Head First Algebra is a clear, easy-to-understand method to learn a subject that many people find intimidating.
The way this book presents information is so conversational and intriguing it helps in the learning process.
This has got to be the best book out there for learning basic algebra.
I wish I had a book like Head First Algebra when I was in high school.
I love how the authors relate math concepts to real-life situations.
The book does a fantastic job of  explaining concepts and taking the reader step-by-step through solving problems.
The book is driven by excellent examples from the world in which students live.
No trains leaving from the same station at the same time moving in opposite directions.
The authors anticipate well the questions that arise in students’ minds and answer them in a timely manner.
Wouldn’t it be dreamy if Algebra was useful in the real world? It’s.
O’Reilly Media books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Many of  the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks.
Where those designations appear in this book, and O’Reilly Media, Inc., was aware of  a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in caps or initial caps.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of  this book, the publisher and the authors assume no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of  the information contained herein.
No variables were harmed in the making of  this book.
This book is dedicated to my parents and teachers for believing that I could be good at math, even when I didn’t agree.
This book is dedicated to the amazing teachers I’ve had in life—starting with my parents who taught me that the most important is to keep learning.
Working with Tracey on this book changed it from being work to being family fun time.
Dan’s degree is in Computer Science with a minor in Mathematics.
For anyone who needs inspiration that Algebra can be fun, fire up a good game of  Halo and think about all the x’s, y’s, and z’s that make it all possible.
Tracey Pilone would first like to thank her co-author and husband for being unwavering in his support and open enough to share the Head First world with her.
She is a freelance technical writer who supported mission planning and RF analysis software for the Navy, right before she decided to write a math book.
She spent several years before becoming a writer working as a construction manager on large commercial construction sites around Washington DC.
That’s where she actually used Algebra on a somewhat regular basis and saw first hand that math is what makes buildings stay up.
Here you are trying to learn something, while here your brain is doing you a favor by making sure the learning doesn’t stick.
Taking Algebra on the road Imagine a world where there is more than ONE thing you don’t know.
Not only are there problems with more than one unknown, but sometimes you’ve got one unknown that appears multiple times in the same.
But when it comes to Algebra, rules are a good thing.
In fact, lots of times, rules will help you solve for an.
Ever looked at an equation and thought, “But what the heck does that mean?” In times.
They let you look at an equation, instead of just reading it.
Have you ever thought, “I just need a little bit more”? But what if someone gave.
When you’re working with an inequality and negative multiplication or division...
Breaking up is hard to do Sometimes being square is enough to give you fits.
So far, we’ve dealt with variables like x and y.
Get ready—it’s time to break down some really tough equations.
But just because an equation doesn’t graph as a straight line, doesn’t mean it’s unimportant.
You’ll find that in the real world, many equations are limited.
For instance, you can’t drive a car -5 miles or dig.
In those cases, you need to set boundaries on your equations.
A function? What the heck is that? Well, turn the page, and find out...
You’ve learned a lot in this book, but Algebra has even more to offer.
Don’t worry, we’re almost done!  Before we go, there are a just few gaps we want to fill in.
Then you’ll be onto Algebra 2, and that’s a whole.
So what’s that good for? Well, in this chapter, it’s all about the.
By the time you’re done, you’ll have won friends, influenced people, and saved.
Compare this vehicle to others in the FREE GAS MILEAGE GUIDE available at the dealer.
Suppose you’re rolling along and realize that you forgot how to multiply.
I can’t believe they put that in an Algebra book.
Are you familiar with integers and fractions and ready to move onto solving for unknowns?
Do you want to learn Algebra by learning the concepts and not just looking for practice problems?
Are you someone who is really uncomfortable with fractions and decimals?
Are you someone who is obsessed with plugging things into a calculator?
If this is the case, pick up Head First Statistics.
It was built that way, and it helps you stay alive.
So what does your brain do with all the routine, ordinary, normal things you encounter? Everything it can to stop them from interfering with the brain’s real job—recording things that matter.
It doesn’t bother saving the boring things; they never make it past the “this is obviously not important” filter.
How does your brain know what’s important? Suppose you’re out for a day hike and a tiger jumps in front of  you, what happens inside your head and body?
This must be important! Don’t forget it! But imagine you’re at home, or in a library.
Or trying to learn some tough technical topic your boss thinks will take a week, ten days at the most.
It’s trying to make sure that this obviously non-important content doesn’t clutter up scarce resources.
Resources that are better spent storing the really big things.
Like remembering where all of  the warp zones are in Super Mario Brothers.
And there’s no simple way to tell your brain, “Hey brain, thank you very much, but no matter how dull this book is, and how little I’m registering on the emotional Richter scale right now, I really do want you to keep this stuff  around.”
We think of a “Head First” reade r as a learner.
If  you really want to learn, and you want to learn more quickly and more deeply, pay attention to how you pay attention.
Most of  us did not take courses on metacognition or learning theory when we were growing up.
We were expected to learn, but rarely taught to learn.
But we assume that if  you’re holding this book, you really want to master Algebra.
And you probably don’t want to spend a lot of  time.
If  you want to use what you read in this book, you need to remember what you read.
To get the most from this book, or any book or learning experience, take responsibility for your brain.
The trick is to get your brain to see the new material you’re learning as Really Important.
Otherwise, you’re in for a constant battle, with your brain doing its best to keep the new content from sticking.
So just how DO you get your brain to treat Algebra like it was a hungry tiger? There’s the slow, tedious way, or the faster, more effective way.
You obviously know that you are able to learn and remember even the dullest of  topics if  you keep pounding the same thing into your brain.
With enough repetition, your brain says, “This doesn’t feel important to him, but he keeps looking at the same thing over and over and over, so I suppose it must be.”
The faster way is to do anything that increases brain activity, especially different types of  brain activity.
The things on the previous page are a big part of  the solution, and they’re all things that have been proven to help your brain work in your favor.
For example, studies show that putting words within the pictures they describe (as opposed to somewhere else in the page, like a caption or in the body text) causes your brain to try to makes sense of  how the words and picture relate, and this causes more neurons to fire.
More neurons firing = more chances for your brain to get that this is something worth paying attention to, and possibly recording.
A conversational style helps because people tend to pay more attention when they perceive that they’re in a conversation, since they’re expected to follow along and hold up their end.
The amazing thing is, your brain doesn’t necessarily care that the “conversation” is between you and a book! On the other hand, if  the writing style is formal and dry, your brain perceives it the same way you experience being lectured to while sitting in a roomful of  passive attendees.
Here’s what WE did: We used pictures, because your brain is tuned for visuals, not text.
As far as your brain’s concerned, a picture really is worth a thousand words.
And when text and pictures work together, we embedded the text in the pictures because your brain works more effectively when the text is within the thing the text refers to, as opposed to in a caption or buried in the text somewhere.
We used redundancy, saying the same thing in different ways and with different media types, and multiple senses, to increase the chance that the content gets coded into more than one area of  your brain.
We used concepts and pictures in unexpected ways because your brain is tuned for novelty, and we used pictures and ideas with at least some emotional content, because your brain is tuned to pay attention to the biochemistry of  emotions.
That which causes you to feel something is more likely to be remembered, even if  that feeling is nothing more than a little humor, surprise, or interest.
We used a personalized, conversational style, because your brain is tuned to pay more attention when it believes you’re in a conversation than if  it thinks you’re passively listening to a presentation.
We included more than 80 activities, because your brain is tuned to learn and remember more when you do things than when you read about things.
We used multiple learning styles, because you might prefer step-by-step procedures, while someone else wants to understand the big picture first, and someone else just wants to see an example.
But regardless of  your own learning preference, everyone benefits from seeing the same content represented in multiple ways.
We include content for both sides of  your brain, because the more of  your brain you engage, the more likely you are to learn and remember, and the longer you can stay focused.
Since working one side of  the brain often means giving the other side a chance to rest, you can be more productive at learning for a longer period of  time.
And we included stories and exercises that present more than one point of view, because your brain is tuned to learn more deeply when it’s forced to make evaluations and judgments.
We included challenges, with exercises, and by asking questions that don’t always have a straight answer, because your brain is tuned to learn and remember when it has to work at something.
Think about it—you can’t get your body in shape just by watching people at the gym.
But we did our best to make sure that when you’re working hard, it’s on the right things.
That you’re not spending one extra dendrite processing a hard-to-understand example, or parsing difficult, jargon-laden, or overly terse text.
In stories, examples, pictures, etc., because, well, because you’re a person.
And your brain pays more attention to people than it does to things.
These tips are a starting point; listen to your brain and figure out what works for you and what doesn’t.
Your brain works best in a nice bath of  fluid.
Dehydration (which can happen before you ever feel thirsty) decreases cognitive function.
There’s only one way to get comfortable with Algebra: do it a lot.
Now, that doesn’t mean you need to lock yourself  in a room with graph paper and pencils.
But it does mean you should think about how Algebra fits in to the world around you.
What problem are you trying to solve? What are the knowns and unknowns? How do they relate to each other? The point is that you won’t really get Algebra if  you just read about it—you need to do it.
We’re going to give you a lot of  practice: every chapter is full of  exercises and asks questions that you need to think about.
Don’t just skip over them—most of  the learning actually happens when you work on the exercises.
Don’t be afraid to peek at the solutions if  you get stuck, but at least give the problems a try first.
Groaning over a bad joke is still better than feeling nothing at all.
If  you find yourself  starting to skim the surface or forget what you just read, it’s time for a break.
Once you go past a certain point, you won’t learn faster by trying to shove more in, and you might even hurt the process.
If you’re trying to understand something, or increase your chance of  remembering it later, say it out loud.
Better still, try to explain it out loud to someone else.
You’ll learn more quickly, and you might uncover ideas you hadn’t known were there when you were reading about it.
Part of  the learning (especially the transfer to long-term memory) happens after you put the book down.
Your brain needs time on its own, to do more processing.
If  you put in something new during that processing time, some of  what you just learned will be lost.
They’re not optional sidebars, they’re part of  the core content! Don’t skip them.
Here’s what YOU can do to bend your brain into submission.
We put them in, but if  we did them for you, that would be like having someone else do your workouts for you.
There’s plenty of  evidence that physical activity while learning can increase the learning.
When the book asks you a question, don’t just skip to the answer.
The more deeply you force your brain to think, the better chance you have of  learning and remembering.
The more you understand, the less you have to memorize.
Read Me This is a learning experience, not a reference book.
We deliberately stripped out everything that might get in the way of  learning whatever it is we’re working on at that point in the book.
And the first time through, you need to begin at the beginning because the book makes assumptions about what you’ve already seen and learned.
We start off by teaching how to solve algebraic equations.
Believe it or not, even if  you’ve never taken Algebra, you can jump right in and start solving for unknowns.
You’ll also learn about the deeper motivations for the study of  Algebra, and why you should learn it in the first place.
Calculators are only for arithmetic you can’t solve easily, NOT for solving equations.
There are lots of  calculators out there that can do lots of  things, including solving equations and plotting graphs.
Since the entire purpose of  working through this book is to learn how to solve and graph equations yourself, using a calculator to do it would just cheat you out of your learning experience!
If you’re rusty on some pre-Algebra topics, we can help.
You need to be able to work with fractions, decimals, integers, and exponents to get into Algebra and solve for unknowns.
The good news is that if  you have a decent understanding of  these concepts, but you can’t quite remember how to get a common denominator, there is a big appendix at the back to help you.
It’s quick and dirty, but it can bring you back up to speed on how to work with those tricky pre-Algebra topics.
There’s a lot in this book about the process: writing out the steps, understanding what’s going on at each point, and really understanding what you’re doing.
We have taken a lot of  time to make sure that each exercise is well explained, and there’s a reason for it—you’re trying to learn here, right? So don’t just skip to the x = 5 and see if  you’re right, because that’s only a piece of  the answer.
The exercises and activities are not add-ons; they’re part of  the core content of  the book.
Some of  them are to help with memory, some are for understanding, and some will help you apply what you’ve learned.
One distinct difference in a Head First book is that we want you to really get it.
And once you finish the book, we want you to remember what you’ve learned.
Most reference books don’t have retention and recall as a goal, but this book is about learning, so you’ll see some of  the same concepts come up more than once.
Everyone can learn Algebra, even if you think you’re not a “math person.”
You need to leave all of  this “I’m not a math person” stuff  behind.
Everybody is a “math person,” you just might not know it yet.
You actually do a lot of  Algebra every day, it’s just not labelled that way.
If  you haven’t yet found your inner “math person,” or you’re rusty, you’ve come to the right place.
You’re going to finish the book knowing how to handle Algebra.
Her research involves the integration of  neuro-imaging and statistics to create “mind reading” machines.
She is studying Dietetics and hopes to practice Clinical Dieteics in the future.
When Dawn’s not working on Head First books, you’ll find her honing her Tai Chi skills, making bobbin lace, or spending time with her lovely husband David.
Karen Shaner is a grad student at Emerson College in Boston pursuing a MA in Publishing and Writing in addition to working at O’Reilly.
In the little free time she has, she enjoys contra dancing, spending time with friends, singing with the Praise Band, and enjoying all that Boston has to offer.
During her five years in Mesquite, she was grade level chair as well as recognized in Who’s Who of  American Teachers.
She graduated from Hardin Simmons with a BS in elementary education and then went on to graduate cum laude from A&M Commerce with a Masters in Education.
She currently resides in Texas with her husband Les and her son Nathan.
Cary Collett majored in physics and astrophysics in college and grad school, respectively, so needless to say, he learned a great deal of  mathematics and will tell anyone that algebra is the hardest subject in the field.
He current works in IT and lives in central Ohio.
Thanks to Sanders Kleinfeld, who took this book from the first outline through the first draft.
He also put up with endless questions (mostly from Tracey), and let us wax philosophical about the math books that 80’s TV stars write.
And to Brett McLaughlin, who in addition to running the whole series, got us from the first draft across the finish line.
His feedback had a whole lot of  “why didn’t we think of  that” in it, which was incredibly helpful.
His understanding about the kids and dog in the background on conference calls was also a plus.
Thanks also to Lou Barr, who somehow managed to take notes that say things like “Lou, can you make this look cool?” and made things look cool.
Since neither of  us have any artistic talent at all, anything that looks fantastic is clearly her work.
Thanks to all of  you for reading the whole book with such enthusiasm.
To Amanda Borcky, for being our sample audience and telling us when we were not being cool.
To Herbert Tracey, who, in addition to teaching Tracey Trig and Calculus, also gave us extremely detailed feedback that made this a much better math book.
To Ariana Anderson and Shannon Stewart, who, as math teachers, could point out gaps in our assumptions and good questions to ask.
Finally, to Cary Collett and Dawn Griffiths, who helped with the math and made sure that we were keeping true to the Head First way.
To all of  the Pilones and all of  the Chadwicks, if  it hadn’t been for your love and support, we wouldn’t have passed Algebra the first time!  To Tracey’s math teachers—Mr.
Booth—who turned her from a being math hater into an engineer; and to Dan’s math teachers—Br.
Newell—you saw past him getting his head stuck in the door and put the first draft of  this book in motion so many years ago....
And last but not least, thanks to Vinny and Nick—the first two projects that Dan and Tracey worked on togetherwho put up with a lot of  “Daddy and Mommy have a call” and learned more Algebra than any preschooler or kindergartner should know.
To Caitrin McCullough, for the cool website and Karen Shaner, for being both a tech reviewer and keeping the review process running smoothly.
To Brittany Smith, the book’s Production Editor, who always answered questions really fast, somehow made sense of  all of  the computer files that went into this thing, and always sent happy emails.
Last but not least, to Laurie Petrycki, who gave us a chance to write a math book that we’re very excited about!
It’s a virtual library that lets you easily search thousands of  top tech books, cut and paste code samples, download chapters, and find quick answers when you need the most accurate, current information.
This is so sweet, but how can we possibly afford it?
What are you waiting for? Go on and get started!
Big Bag o’ Games A variety of games for the KillerX system (HD-ISH-5309)
Gaming Headset Headset with microphone, ideal for online gaming (HS-AL1-867)
It all started with a big gaming sale Jo has been watching the game system battles for a while now and has finally decided on the one she wants.
Her favorite system’s on sale this week, and she’s ready to buy.
But can she afford it? That’s where she needs a little help from you.
Jo’s been waiting for the right game system to come along.
This is the system Jo’s been waiting for - it’s on sale...
I can handle $199 - but is that really how much the system’s going to cost?
What does a system really cost? When you buy things—especially expensive electronic things—there are lots of  pieces that add into the price besides just the number on a sales flyer:  sales tax, an extended warranty, shipping and handling, etc.
System o Games A variety of games for the oPOD system (HD-ISH-5309)
Gaming Headset Headset with microphone, ideal for online gaming (HS-AL1-867)
After that, we need to think about taxes, which are 5%
Let’s figure out how much Jo’ll have to pay in taxes:
Add all these up and you get how much Jo really needs to spend to buy the console.
If you’re rusty on your decimal math, just turn to the appendix and brush up!
Figuring out the total wasn’t just addition! It was solving for an unknown—and that’s Algebra.
In this case the unknown was how much everything was going to cost.
This was the unknown - y ou had all the.
Algebra is about solving for unknowns Algebra is about finding the missing information that you’re looking for by using the information you already have.
The unknown could be the cost of a car loan, the quantity of  soda you need, or how high you can throw a water balloon.
All the other things that you’ll learn in Algebra are just ways to jiggle things around to help you find a piece of  missing information.
There are rules about when you can multiply things or when you can bump something from one side of  an equals sign to another, but at the end of  the day, they’re all just tricks to help you find that missing piece of  information you’re looking for.
Jo’s got more unknowns So Jo knows how much it will take to buy an awesome gaming system, including an extended warranty.
Now that she’s paid for the console,  how much can Jo spend on accessories? Let’s start by writing this out in words:
Now just fill in the blanks, and we can figure out Jo’s accessory budget:
Here’s the cost of the console you figured out earlier.
Here’s the cost of the console you figured out earlier.
Let’s take a closer look at what we just did.
First, we’re going to swap out the unknown box for the standard Algebra version of  an unknown—an x.
We can also turn this around to be: We’ll talk more about.
Understanding a problem and finding the unknown, x, is working with Algebra.
Using tricks like writing the problem out with words and flipping things around are just ways to make finding that unknown possible.
Cool! $86.32 is still plenty to spend on games and a headset.
Doesn’t have to be x; it could be any other letter.
The unknown in any given situation is called a variable.
In the real world, problems present themselves every day; translating them into mathematical equations allows you to solve them.
As you progress with math, you’ll see x, y, and z pretty often.
Q: Back on page 6, how come you could just flip that equation? A: All we really did was switch the same equation around, called manipulating the equation.
There are rules about exactly how you can work with equations without changing any values, and we’ll learn lots more about them in the rest of this book.
Equations are math sentences Equations, like the one you used earlier to figure out how much Jo could spend on accessories, are just math sentences.
So when we talked about Jo’s account balance, we were actually using an equation:
Our equation means “The account balance minus how much we spend on the console equals how much we have left for accessories.”  So, that means that the account balance must equal the cost of  the console plus the money for accessories.
If  we write that sentence as an equation it looks like this:
Both sentences mean the same thing; they’re just phrased differently.
Over the next few pages, you’ll learn how to rearrange math sentences and make sure that you don’t change any values.
Your job is to make equations from the magnets that say the same thing as the word problems.
Once you have the equation put together, circle the unknown—the value you need to figure out.
Jo started playing a hot new game, but she only has two hours before she has to go out.
How much time does she have left to play level 4?
The cost per membership times the number of Jo and her brothers equals how much money they’ll spend to upgrade their LIVE memberships.
Math Magnets Solutions Below are some word problems and magnets.
Your job is to make equations from the magnets that say the same thing as the word problems.
Once you have the equation put together, circle the unknown—the value you need to figure out.
Jo started playing a hot new game, but she only has two hours before she has to go out.
How much time does she have left for level 4?
Now you build the equations! Take the “math sentence” you wrote and translate it into an equation.
Use the numbers that were given and x for the unknown.
The same thing for this problem - you fill in the x for the unknown.
Use this line to combine the numbers and write a shorter equation.
Jo started playing a game that just came out, but she only has two hours before she has to go out.
How much time does she have left for level 4?
Now you can build the equations! Take the “math sentence” you wrote and translate it into an Algebraic equation.
Use the numbers that were given and x for the unknown.
Jo started playing a game that just came out - but she only has two hours before she has to go out.
How much time does she have left for level 4?
We need minutes here since the time for the levels is in minutes.
What we really care about here is what x is—the unknown number of  games.
We don’t really care about the seven games on the left side of  the equation.
In fact, we can get rid of  that seven as long as we make sure we do the same thing to both sides of  the equation.
An equals sign means that both sides are the same.
So if  we take 7 away from one side, we have to do the same thing to the other side of  the equation:
Jo is trying to decide if  it’s worth it for her to buy a LIVE subscription.
How many does she have that can be played online? Does it make sense for her to buy the subscription?
We’re going to jump right into the equation without the sentence.
If it helps, you can write it out, but just thinking about the equation in words first should be enough to help.
What you need is a way to use the operations that you already know (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division) to solve equations.
When you do something to one side of  the equation, you have to do the same thing to the other side of  the equation.
Here’s another way to look at Jo’s online problem without pictures:
How does that help! I’m not going to spend the rest of my life drawing pictures.
When you get x all by itself, you’re isolating the variable.
Isolating the variable means you’ve gotten the variable by itself  on the left side of  the equation and everything else stacked up over on the right.
Knowing that your goal is to isolate the variable means that you know which numbers to move away from the left side.
Since you’re trying to get x alone, that means that you move the seven, not the 10!
The answer is going to be x = something, so we need to get rid of the seven.
So which operation do you use when? The opposite of  addition is subtraction.
So, if  some number is being added on one side of  the equation, and you want to move that number to the other side, you can subtract that number from both sides.
The math term that describes opposite operations is inverse operations.
The basic math operations are addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
An inverse operation is the operation that undoes an operation (like addition undoes subtraction)
Inverse operations let you shift a number or variable from one side of the equation to the other by “undoing” that number on one side of  an equation.
This is why when you needed to get rid of the seven (an added number), you subtracted seven from both sides.
Look at the equation and figure out what numbers to move.
That’s because we’re trying to isolate the variable, the x.
You need to use the inverse operation for the number to remove it.
Whatever you decide to do to one side of  the equation, you must do to the other.
We’re not inverse operations unless both of  us are here.
So addition is always paired with subtraction, multiplication always with division..
Inverse Ops: Opposites attract, and multiplication is the opposite of  division.
Inverse Ops: Yeah, and we’re all opposites because we all undo each other.
Head First:   When you say undo each other, do you mean if  there’s a multiplication, than division can make it go away?
Inverse Ops:  Well, not really go away—remember, our job is to keep everything in balance.
If  you have a multiplication you need to move, you can undo that multiplication with a division—on both sides of  the equation.
Head First: Ok, I think I get it—you can move numbers from one side of  the equation to the other.
So you’re pretty useful for getting a variable by itself ?
A little addition here or multiplication there, and you can get almost any variable by itself.
Head First: Very cool! So any last words before we sign off ?
You have to be careful that you keep the equation balanced.
There are also a few more pairs of  us floating around out there, but they’ll turn up later.
Head First: Well, it’s been great talking to you—all of you—and I appreciate you coming by.
Until next time, may your multiplications always have a division, and your additions subtract.
Below are equations that have unknowns and numbers on both sides of the equations.
Use inverse operations to isolate the variable and solve the equation.
Whoever thought it was a good idea to use x to mean the typical unknown apparently didn’t mind the confusion it might cause with the multiplication sign, x.
They gave up on using x for multiplication and came up on with a few easier to read options:
Why are there dots and parentheses for multiplication? What’s wrong.
The division sign you’re used to seeing was tossed away, too.
Below are equations that have unknowns and numbers on both sides of the equations.
Your job was to use inverse operations to isolate the variable and solve the equation.
Don’t forget to check your work - just plug your answer back in for x and make sure it works.
And check this one, just to make sure that fraction is right.
Match each example of  something you’ve learned in this chapter to it’s name.
I must have done something wrong - I thought I had enough money!
Jo figured out that she had $86.32 left in her account for accessories.
She decided that she wants to get more games and not worry about the headset just yet.
Jo did some quick Algebra to figure out how many game she can buy:
Big Bag o’ GamesA variety of games for the oPOD system (HD-ISH-5309)
Jo’s going to buy a couple of games on special.
Checking You’ll find as you go forward with Algebra that the problems become more complicated, and it’s pretty easy to make a mistake.
Jo didn’t divide correctly, and that got her! Checking your work doesn’t mean just looking over what you did.
Substitution uses your solution in the original equation Substitution means putting something in for something else.
A substitute teacher is in the place of  a regular teacher, right? To check your work, you substitute in the answer you found for the variable in the original equation.
Substitution is a process that can be used not just for checking your work, but for other things too.
When we get to more complex equations, and equations with more than one variable, you’ll want to use substitution as part of  the solving process.
Take Jo’s answer and substitute it for x in the original equation.
Substitution means putting a new value back into the original equation.
It’s easy to do, and it will tell you if you have the right answer!! Seriously.
It’s easy to check your work after you’ve solved for the unknown.
Q: When else will we use substitution? A: You’ll see it come up again and again—always with checking your work, but also as a starting point to solve equations with two variables, for graphing lines, figuring out inequalities ...keep reading, we’re getting there!
Q: Why are there different notations for multiplication and division?
A: It’s really more convenient and a lot less confusing than the traditional multiplication and division signs.
As you get to later chapters, you’ll see more complicated equations where being able to show division as a single line really makes a huge difference.
Multiplication (especially with parentheses) is the same way—sometimes what’s inside that parentheses can get pretty complicated.
Finally, multiplying a number by a variable is so common that just writing them next to each other is a lot less confusing than having a multiplication symbol in between.
Q: When should I use parentheses versus dots versus just bumping the number and variable together?
A: There’s no difference between the different notations; it’s just whatever is easier and looks cleanest.
If you have a number times a bunch of things, you can use parentheses.
If you have a number times a variable, just push them together.
With division, you almost always see the stacked form, unless you’re typing an equation in a word processor or an email, where the stacked form is a pain.
Q: What’s the difference between a negative number and subtracting a positive number?
Q: There seem to be a lot of elements that go into solving an equation, how do I keep track?
A: There are a lot, but they’ll soon become second nature.
Once you get used to working with equations, you’ll automatically use inverse operations to move numbers around, you’ll simplify the equation you end up with, and then you’ll just keep going until you get that variable by itself.
Later we’ll follow the exact steps, but really they are just.
Probably the easiest one to forget is checking your work...make sure you do it!
During Jo’s embarrassing trip the first time she tried to buy the games, she put back the headset and just bought the new game, so she has $33.55 left.
How much does she need to save up to buy all of these accessories?
Jo wants to buy an extra level for her game on LIVE, and it’s 720 points.
Jo’s perfecting her set up with that new game she bought with what she had left of her savings.
Now how much does Jo need to come up with? She wants all the accessories and the new level for her game...
Jo has figured out that she can sell some used games that she’s already beaten to pay for the headset, subscription, and extra level.
How many games does she need to sell to cover the new stuff?
During Jo’s embarrassing trip the first time she tried to buy the games, she put back the headset and just bought the new game, so she has $33.55 left.
How much does she need to save up to buy all of these accessories?
Jo wants to buy an extra level for her game on LIVE, and it’s 720 points.
Jo’s perfecting her set up with that new game she bought with what she had left of her savings.
Now how much does Jo need to come up with? She wants all the accessories and the new level for the game...
Jo has figured out that she can sell some used games that she’s already beaten to pay for the headset, subscription, and extra level.
How many does she need to sell to cover the new stuff?
Equation training Let’s put all your mad equation solving skills together to solve a real world problem using Algebra:
Understand the problem statement Each problem will come with hints and an unknown.
Figure out what you’re looking for and what other numbers in the problem will help you solve it.
Write the equation to solve it Once you understand what you need to find, write out the equation in algebraic form.
Write the equation as unknown = number Once you’ve gotten the variable by itself, you’ve found the solution!
Check your work!! Check that you have the right answer by plugging your number back into the original problem in place of  the unknown.
Figure out how to isolate the variable Use inverse operations and work the arithmetic when you have actual numbers to get the variable by itself  on one side of  the equation.
Manipulate the equation Apply your techniques to actually move the numbers around in the equation to get that variable by itself.
Make sure you always keep the equation equal by doing the same thing to both sides.
Rewrite the equation Clean up the equation by performing any arithmetic you’ve setup after you moved things around and see if  you’ve gotten the variable by itself.
If  not, apply another technique to get the variable by itself.
Jo has an awesome setup! After a trip to sell off  4 games and buy a headset, Jo signed into LIVE and bought that new level, and she is ready to play!
This is the system she wanted, and with all the extras, she’s ready to go.
Then she bought and sold a few games, so she could afford a new headset and online play.
Jo’s about to spend hours on her new game—but when she’s done, it’ll be easy to figure out what game she can afford next!
System o Games A variety of games for the oPOD system (HD-ISH-5309)
Gaming Headset Headset with microphone, ideal for online gaming (HS-AL1-867)
Equationcross Take some time to sit back and give your right brain something to do.
It’s your standard crossword; all of the solution words are from this chapter.
I used to be so afraid of the unknown, but now Bob can take.
Imagine a world where there is more than ONE thing you don’t know.
Paul loves “Pajama Death” Paul is a huge fan of  the punk band Pajama Death.
The band’s kicking off  their US tour this week in Florida, and Paul’s determined to be there.
Paul’s got his savings ready to blow, but he’s got no idea how much cash he needs to pull out of  his account.
Can you help Paul? Paul has $1,330 in his bank account and is willing to spend it all.
In fact, Paul wants to bring his buddies and really blow it out this weekend.
But how many friends can he bring? Not only that, but there are a lot of  costs to keep up with:
Always start with what you know The best way to work any problem is to figure out what things you know and what things you don’t know.
The big unknown in this problem is how many friends Paul can bring.
We also know Paul’s got $1,330 in his bank account.
Paul can spend up to that amount on the trip.
We can’t simply set these things equal to each other...
What else has to go into the equation to add up to the total cost of the trip? Does it matter how many people come?
There’s a COST for each guy Paul is going to have to spend money on gas to get to Florida.
But what about food? Tickets? Hotel rooms? Those all depend on how many guys come (and Paul is one of  those guys)
So we’ve got to figure out the fixed costs, like gas, and then we’ve got to figure out how much each guy costs.
That’s got to be multiplied by each guy, and added to the fixed costs.
And all of  that has to be related to how much money Paul can actually spend.
The fixed costs won’t change, but the total cost goes up as we add more guys (g)
The question is how do we figure out how much each guy costs?
What else has to go into the equation to add up to the total cost of the trip? Does it matter how many people come?
Some depend on how many people come, but not all of them.
These three depend upon how many guys go.Gas is the same no matter.
Each person that comes means more food, another ticket, etc.
Fixed costs are just costs that don’t change depending on how many guys come.
What we were missing is the expense of the trip itself.
Costs Magnets Now that you have the basic idea of the equation, use the magnets below to put together what the cost of the trip is based on the number of guys coming.
Remember, some costs depend on how many people are there, and some don’t.
Costs Magnets Solutions Your job was to use the magnets below to put together what the cost of the trip is based on the number of guys coming.
Remember, some costs depend on how many people are there, and some don’t.
Gas is our the fixed cost - it doesn’t really matter if Paul comes by himself or if he crams 10 people clown-style into his car.
And here’s how much it can all add up to - we’re going to assume Paul is going to spend every last penny, so we’ll just use.
This is why the number of guys (g) is our unknown...
Replace your words with numbers Now that you’ve got a general equation, you’re ready to put some numbers in.
You can replace the boxes below with actual numbers for each cost...
Use the specific numbers for the costs to figure out the actual equation for the trip.
You don’t need to solve the equation, just get it to a form you can work with.
First replace each box with the actual values from the conversation above...
Now clean up the numbers and simplify the equation a little.
Ok- tickets for the show are going to be $50 each.
Fast food for most meals - say $60 for the trip, each?
Use the specific numbers for the costs to figure out the actual equation for the trip.
You don’t need to solve the equation, just get it to a form you can work with.
Here we just did a little clean up - now this is looking like an equation we can solve....
Back in Chapter 1, you worked equations to isolate the variable.
In this case, the variable is g, and we can use inverse operations to get to just g:
We have to get 160 off of this side of the equation...
We’ll need to get that 410 out of the way too...
And no matter what you do,  you’ve got to keep the sides of  the equation equal.
Which should you do first? Will you get different answers if you do one before the other? Which is right?
If you follow the rules, you’ll ALWAYS get the right answer The most important part of  equations is that they stay equal on both sides.
So the question is really, which is easiest to do first?
When you’ve got more than one way to solve an equation, look for the SIMPLEST way to work with your equation.
Working with 410 first was fine, but we were left with all those nasty decimal numbers to work with.
That’s not bad, but without a calculator, it might be harder than it really needs to be.
Even though you’ll get the same answers doing things both ways, sometimes one particular way is easier.
Let’s try and work things out the other way, by subtracting the 160 from both sides first...
Doing the subtraction first was easier, and we got the same answer.
It was easier for two reasons: you didn’t have to deal with decimals until the end, and solving the equation took less steps!
It’s not always easy to determine which steps you should do first, but the good news is that even if  you don’t pick the easiest strategy, you can still get to the right solution.
Just follow the rules, and you’ll get the same solution, no matter what order you work things out in.
We have to do the same thing to both sides of the equation.
So 2.8537 guys can go on Paul’s trip? That doesn’t make any sense...
How are we supposed to take Paul, one other dude, and .8537 of a third guy?
Q: What about the order of operations? Don’t I need to do multiplication and division before addition and subtraction?
A: If you have a bunch of additions, subtractions, multiplications, and divisions all together that you need to work out, then yes, you need to follow the order of operations.
But what we’re doing here is just manipulating the equation.
We’re keeping things equal by doing exactly the same thing to each side of the equation.
When you manipulate an equation, it doesn’t matter what you do first as long as you do that thing to both sides of an equation.
Q: Do I always have to solve my equations twice? How would I know which operation to do first on a problem?
We just did that here to show that either approach works.
As for what to do first with different problems, well, it depends.
When you have the option of doing addition or subtraction to get terms from the left to the right, they’re usually the easiest to knock out first.
Then you have fewer things to deal with for later manipulations, like multiplication or division.
Q: Can there be even more complicated equations? What if there are lots and lots of steps?
A: Equations can get really long, and we’ll get to some of those later, but the general idea remains the same.
You’ll need to determine which variable you need to get by itself and then manipulate the equation to get that variable alone.
It doesn’t matter how many times you apply inverse operations or multiply both sides of an equation or any other operation.
As long as you follow the rules, you’ll get the solution you’re after.
Q: When you start with a big long problem, do you have to write the problem out with words first?
It’s up to you, but using words is a helpful way to get the idea of the problem you’re solving down on paper without getting bogged down with numbers.
Writing out a problem also means you have to step back for a second and think about the context of the problem.
We’re going to talk a lot more about the order of  operations.
Don’t worry if  you’re still a little confused about the order of  operations.
We’ll be using the order over and over in the rest of  this book.
By the time you’re through, you’ll be a pro when it comes to ordering your operations.
You can afford to bring more of us if you don’t pay for a hotel room for each of us.
O’Brien you’re a bio major—can I bring 0.8 of one of you guys?
So, you technically got a correct solution for g, but 2.8537 is probably not the right answer for this particular problem.
When you’re solving an Algebra problem, part of  the problem is working the equation...
Math is not just about numbers or manipulating equations; it’s about solving real-world problems.
Paul’s buddies are right! Our equation charges each guy $300 for the hotel.
How do we fix this? What part of our equation has to change? Is the cost for each guy still based on the number of guys?
A variable can appear in an equation MORE THAN ONE TIME The hotel rooms cost $300
And right now, we’re multiplying that $300 by each guy on the trip.
Wait - we have two g’s in the equation now.
What are we supposed to do with those? Are they the same?
This $300 gets added in, then multiplied by the number of guy.
But now, we need to take that $300 and separate it out.
So for each guy, then, the room cost is $150...
YES! If  the same variable shows up more than once in an equation, the variable has to have the same value.
So each time g shows up, it must represent the same value.
In fact, since g represents the same value each time it shows up, you can combine terms where g is the variable.
Let’s see how we can use that to help us out...
Use the new costs to figure out how many guys can go if they share a room.
Be careful, this equation will take multiple steps, and you’ll probably need to combine some g’s.
So does this answer work? Really, how many guys can come?
Then solve for the number of guys that can come..
There’s something tricky about this problem related to whether an even or odd number of guys come.
Your job was to use the new costs to figure out how many guys can go if guys share a room.
So does this answer work? Really, how many guys can come?
First we’ll get rid of the parentheses by adding up the values.
Always check your work! That’s a great question, with an easy answer.
Just plug your answer back into the equation wherever your variable appears, and make sure both sides of  the equation come out to be the same.
So it looks like 4 of us can go if we double up in the rooms.
Before I say anything to the guys, how can we be sure this is right?
Check that you got the right answer by plugging your answer back into your equation and making sure things are equal.
Check that you got the right answer by plugging it back into the equation and making sure things are equal.
Plug in 4.5 for g wherever it appears in the equation.
Use the order of operations to work out the rest of the math...
Checking your work proves your answer You solved for g, substituted your answer back in to check it, and made sure you got the right answer.
So now you’ve handled food, you’ve handled hotel rooms, and you’ve handled tickets.
There’s only one thing that could turn this whole trip on its head...
That’s the value that makes all of the numbers work out.
But since Paul can’t bring half a person, 4 is the answer he actually needs.
But, when we go back to check our work, we need to use the mathematically correct answer, 4.5
Q: Is it worth taking all that time to check your work?
It is crazy-frustrating to go through a whole problem and get an answer, but get it wrong.
That is a totally preventable problem if you go back and check your work.
Q: My work looks a little different than the solution, but I got the right answer.
With Algebra, you just need to apply the rules consistently, and you’ll get to the same answer.
The solutions we’ve presented are the way we would go about getting the answer, but they’re definitely not the only way.
Q: When we isolated the variable, how did you know to subtract before you divided?
A: We were trying to minimize the number of terms we’d have in our division.
If you can reduce the number of terms in the equation by combining like terms, that usually makes things easier for later steps.
As long as you manipulate the equation using the rules properly, you will not get a wrong answer...
If you do start to feel like you’re going down the wrong road, don’t feel like you have to keep going that way.
Just go back to your original problem and start over.
Q: How can this be math if there is more than one way to do the problem? Isn’t there supposed to be just one right answer?
A: There’s a big difference between “one right answer” and “one way to get there.” A big part of mathematics is that there are different ways to solve problems and still arrive at the same (correct) answer.
For example, you could do away with multiplication and just use lots of additions.
But using multiplication is another way to get to the same answer.
Different problems will need different techniques, but you should always end up at the same place when you’re done.
Algebra is about solving for an unknown, but it’s also about making smart choices about how to get to that solution.
This is your chance to look at some problems, write some equations, and do some manipulating.
They make most of their money on the road (the music industry is a tough business)
The deal Pajama Death has with the record company is that they get the same percentage of profit from all of the different revenue they make on tour.
In order for the band to make $15,000 a show, what is the minimum percentage of the revenue they need to get from the record label?
A couple of hints: a percentage will be a decimal or fraction in an equation, and each type of revenue will have the same profit percentage.
Pajama Death’s Loss One of Pajama Death’s concerts got a little out of hand, and the venue has fined them $3600
These are each pieces of revenue that were listed above.
We used “P” for percentage, and since it’s the same for each source of revenue, it is in all the equations.The total profit will just be.
In the problem statement it said that they want to make $15,000 or more.
You may not have divided by 1000 or added up all of  the terms first, but they should all get you to the same answer.
Since the fine is the same for each incident, we can use one variable: x.
Now check your work by plugging your answer back in...
Pajama Death’s Loss One of Pajama Death’s concerts got a little out of hand, and the venue has fined them $3600
What’s a road trip without some girls? You’ve figured out how many guys can come, but what about girlfriends? Paul doesn’t have any more money, so if  girls are coming, Paul can’t bring as many guys.
Not only that, but girls might not cost as much as guys to bring...
So there are a few things we’ll need to change with the equation to add girls to the mix:
Girls don’t want to share a room with a guy—they’re going to need their own hotel rooms.
The problem we have is that our current equation multiplies the number of  guys coming on the trip by their costs:
I want to go too! And I’m not real excited about being the only girl, so I want to bring some friends..
We need another variable Since girls have a different cost associated with them, we need to treat them separately in our equation.
Use the information about cost per guy and the information about cost per girl to write up the new equation we need to solve to figure out who can come.
Don’t forget about two guys sharing a hotel room - the girls can do the same thing.
Be careful when you combine your variables - make sure you only mix g’s with g’s and r’s with r’s.
These are the same type of costs for the girls, just some different values.
Hotel room costs the same for girls, but it has to be girls only!
The equation really hasn’t changed much - it’s just similar costs with an additional variable, r.
Now what do we do? We have two variables in there, g & r!
Hmm - how does this relate to combining like terms like we did earlier with g’s and r’s?
Two variables seem to be a problem, but it’s something we can handle.
You put together a equation to say how things relate to each other in terms of  the variable.
So with just guys, we were putting the cost of  the trip in terms of the number of  guys going, the g variable.
Even the individual parts of  the trip were that way, like how we figured out the cost of  the hotel:
For that, we need to talk a little bit more about what exactly a term is...
The base hotel cost is $150, then for each guy that comes along the total hotel cost goes up by that amount.
A term is a chunk of an algebraic equation It’s important to make a distinction between a variable and a term.
A variable is some letter we use to stand in for something that’s unknown: g for guys, r for girls, etc.
A term, on the other hand, is just a piece of  an equation.
But how do you figure out how many terms there are in an equation? They’re held together by multiplication (or division)
Term - A piece of an algebraic statement that is related by multiplication or division.
The most common equations you will see in multiple variables will be x and y, even though in our equation, we’ve got g and r.
When you get into multiple variable equations, this is where “in terms of ” really starts to matter.
It’s much easier to work with if  you get one variable “in terms of ” the other.
A single equation in two variables can not be solved without an additional relationship.
An equation in two variables establishes a proportional relationship between the two variables.
Match each equation to a description of  which variable is in terms of which other variable.
Some equations have two correct answers, and some descriptions will be used twice!
Can be simplified to variable f in terms of  variable r.
Can be simplified to variable f in terms of  variable r.
I think we should have the same number of girls as guys.
Finish up the road trip equation, and solve for g.
What’s the relationship between guys and girls? From what we know about multiple variables in an equation, we have to find another relationship between guys and girls (g & r) in order to get any further with Paul’s problem.
To make things fair, let’s say that we have to bring the same number of guys and girls.
If  we say we have to have the same number of  guys and girls coming on the trip, then we can say g = r.
Once we say that, everywhere you see an r, you can substitute in a g (since they are equal)
Q: Why did we only write part of the decimal, and not the whole thing?
A: Because for this problem, we can only bring whole people.
You could round down to the nearest whole person and just show two decimal places, but to avoid confusion, we used one decimal place.
Remember to always think about the context of the problem.
Q: So can we just say that g = r? A: Sure, because that’s the second relationship (equation) that we were given for this problem.
It was part of the problem statement, and we just worked with it to solve our initial equation.
Knowing that g = r means that you can substitute g back in for r in the original equation and then solve for one variable.
Q: Can it sometimes be the end of the problem if you don’ t have a number? What if you can only get an equation in terms of two variables?
A: Depending upon your problem, that may be all you need.
It’s another case of needing to think about the entire problem, not just the equation.
The goal may just be the proportion of the variables and not a numerical answer.
Yor job was to finish up the road trip equation, and solve for g.
Going back to the new g = r relationship, you also know.
That makes sense, because the total number of g + r is still 4.6, just like when it was just guys.
First we’ll get rid of the parentheses by adding up the values.
Road Trip! With a little Algebra, you’ve figured out how many can go and how much the whole thing is going to cost.
Unfortunately, this is a problem that even a great Algebra book can’t solve...
Simplify each of these mathematical expressions and combine like terms.
So remember that a term needs to be held together only by multiplication or division.
Multicross Take some time to sit back and give your right brain something to do.
It’s your standard crossword; all of the solution words are from this chapter.
Tells you what you're looking for and what you need to find it.
A piece of an algebraic statement lumped together through multiplication.
When solving a problem, it’s always important to think about .....
In order to solve an equation  you have to do this to the variable.
Tells you what you're looking for and what you need to find it.
A piece of an algebraic statement lumped together through multiplication.
When solving a problem, it’s always important to think about .....
In order to solve an equation  you have to do this to the variable.
Simplify each of these mathematical expressions and combine like terms.
So remember that a term needs to be held together only by multiplication or division.
This is not a like term with x because there is an additional variable (y) in the term.
Writing on the problem can help keep track of the like terms.
Multicross Solution Take some time to sit back and give your right brain something to do.
It’s your standard crossword; all of the solution words are from this chapter.
Tells you what you're looking for and what you need to find it.
A piece of an algebraic statement lumped together through multiplication.
When solving a problem, it’s always important to think about .....
In order to solve an equation you have to do this to the variable.
Tools for your Algebra Toolbox This chapter was about solving more complex algebraic equations.
No matter how many terms, you’re still looking to isolate a variable in order to solve an equation.
Follow the rules Mom says if I don’t do my.
But when it comes to Algebra, rules are a good thing.
In fact, lots of times, rules will help you solve for.
Math or No Math It’s the quiz show that’s sweeping the nation—Math or No Math.
This new primetime hit pits two contestants against each other, struggling to solve math problems.
It’s easy to find contestant, but Math or No Math needs help.
They don’t have any judges to figure out if  contestants are getting the problems right! That’s where you come in....
If you’re not sure about exponents, turn to the appendix...
Mark up their work step by step to show how they each got their answer.
Mark up their work step by step to show how they each got their answer.
Kate is right because Kate’s answer follows the rules for working with numbers.
Kate solved the expression properly because she used the order of  operations.
She got the correct answer because she followed that order—which is really just a rule for working with numbers—precisely.
If you don’t follow the rules nothing’s going to work out the way it’s supposed to.
Jack DIDN’T follow the rules, so Jack got the wrong answer.
That seems pretty logical, but since that’s not what everyone else doing Algebra has agreed on, he’s not going to get the right answer to problems.
That order needs to be the same for everyone who works with the expression, or there wouldn’t be any right answers.
You need to learn and use the order of  operations to solve problems, and that’s what we’re going to do next.
That way, you can be sure you—and the Math or No Math contestants—are following the rules.
The order of operations is one of the ways everyone can get the same answer to the same problem.
How come Kate’s right? Who says? Jack’s answer makes sense too!
There’s an order for working expressions The order you’re supposed to work with numbers in a math expression is called the order of  operations.
If  you always follow the order of  operations, you’ll get the same answers to problems that everyone else does.
You need to work through and get all of those pieces simplified first and write those down.
After simplifying inside the parentheses, the exponent needs to go next.
Multiplication and division are the exact opposite of each other, so they are the same “strength” operation.
Addition & subtraction are the “weakest” operations, so they go last.
We don’t have any multiplication or division for this problem, so we leave the expression as-is.
Everything in the expression that is raised to a power, any power (that includes roots, too)
These operations are equal in order, so work left to right, simplifying both the multiplication and division parts of  the expression:
Addition and subtraction are equal in terms of  the order, so work from left to right doing all the addition and subtraction.
Your job is to figure out what the next thing to do in the problem is.
Use the order of operations, and place the correct magnet for the operation you’d do next.
For this one, what is the first thing you d.
This one is tricky - take your time, and you’ll figure it out.
Math Magnets Solution Your job is to figure out what the next thing to do in the problem is.
Use the order of operations, and place the correct magnet for the operation you’d do next.
You should drop the parentheses, and then do the exponent (the square root)
Since everything is grouped over the 2, you need to simplify inside the parentheses -and in there the exponent goes first.
Inside the parentheses is simplified, so the next thing is multiplication.
The addition goes first because it’s grouped over the division sign.
You still need to work inside the parentheses - but you need to handle the exponent inside first - and don’t forget that roots are just another way of writing exponents.
A: It was established by early mathematicians (geeky people who do Algebra for fun) who were trying to compare their work.
The order let those folks talk to each other and get the same answers for their problems, which is a pretty big deal.
Q: Why did the order of operations get set up this way?
Parentheses are a way to say, “Do this first!” Then, exponents, and then multiplication and division.
And we work on what’s what’s left by moving from left to right because that’s the way we read.
Q: Are roots exponents? A: Yes, which means that they go second in the order of operations.
If you need a refresher on the details, just turn to the appendix, where exponents and roots are discussed.
Q: Do inverse operations always go together in the order of operations?
Q: Do I have to memorize this? A: Yes, but if you just think of the operations going in order of strength that should help.
If you want to work with large numerators and denominators, you can (but it’s not recommended)
Q: So are fractions really division, or can you leave fractions alone?
If you want to divide your fractions to get a number like 0.5, you can...
Q: When can you drop the parentheses? Do they need to stay after you did what was inside?
Just like the fractions, when you’ve combined whatever was in a set of parentheses and you’re down to the most simplified form, you’re done.
Some people like to keep the parentheses to indicate multiplication or to clarify exponents, but it’s not required.
A: It can be, that’s why you should write down your work as you’re solving a problem.
In fact, since Jack wrote down his steps, we were able to figure out where he made his mistakes, and why he got a wrong answer.
It’s a good idea to write down what your expression looks like at each step.
You can keep track of what you did and check your work.
Now contestants get one point for getting a problem’s answer right, and another point for getting the right answer first.
Let’s see how Kate and Jack do, especially now that everyone knows the order of  operations...
Rusty on fractions? Just flip to the appendix in the back for a little help.
Mark up their work step by step to show how they each got their answer.
Jack’s got it now parentheses first so he needs common denominators...
One more reordering and she can add the whole numbers...
Reduce the fraction and make it proper They both got it right.
Kate was way faster - she saved a ton of steps over Jack.
Mark up their work step by step to show how they each got their answer.
What? Kate totally blew off the order of operations, but got the right answer.
Kate didn’t ignore the order of  operations; she just used some other properties of  numbers first.
Kate used the associative and commutative properties to work with her equation, and then applied the order of  operations.
Properties like the associative and commutative properties are really just another type of  rule...
Don’t turn the page until you think you know where Kate did something sneaky.
You can re-group your equations The associative property lets you change the grouping of numbers in addition or multiplication operations.
Suppose you’ve got a bunch of  numbers you need to add.
You can change the groupings of  those numbers around all you want.
What’s going on here? Because all of  the operations are addition, the parentheses don’t affect the outcome.
The associative property says that when you’re performing addition or multiplication, grouping does not affect the outcome, so you can regroup those types of  problems all you need.
Kate used the associative property to re-group parts of her problem.
So she worked with common denominators next to each other first, and then did the rest.
The Associative Property - Changing the groupings of a set of numbers being added or multiplied does not change the outcome of the operation.
Here’s your chance to put the associative property to work.
There are two expressions next to each other, regrouped for you.
We’ve already changed the grouping for you - see how it works both ways!
Why did the answers come out the same for some of the problems and not for the others?
Why did the answers come out the same for some of the problems and not for the others?
You can change the grouping for addition or multiplication - but it doesn’t work for division and subtraction.
Your job was to solve both sets of problems, see if the answers came out the same, and figure out why you got the results you did.
These two are the same - the associative property works here.
This didn’t work either - the associative property has some limits!
Regrouping both of these does not change the VALUE of the solution.
Regrouping these totally changed the value of the solution - the property doesn’t work for these!
Q: So do we need the order of operations or not?
With the associative property, you are not changing the order of operations—you’ll still do parentheses first—you’re just moving certain parts of a problem around.
Q: What’s the point of the associative property anyway? So what if I can move groupings around?
A: The associative property means you can work through an expression in the easiest, fastest way.
Grouping together fractions that are easy to work with saves tons of common denominator time, and you can do the same thing with decimals, too.
Grouping things in terms of how you want to work on them can sometimes help you get started on a tough problem, too!
Q: Are there more properties? A: Yes - we’re going to talk about two more in the next few pages, the commutative property and the distributive property.
The commutative property lets you reorder items in an equation.
The distributive property helps spread multiplication and division out across the equation (or pull it together into a single term, but we’ll get to that later)
Q: So the associative property lets me change the order of numbers, right?
A: No - the associative property just says you can change the grouping of numbers that are added or multiplied.
But you can’t change any orderings, or move numbers from one part of your problem to another.
However, all is not lost, There is a property that will help you out with ordering: the commutative property.
Once you get that figured out, you’ll be able to reorder and regroup.
The associative property says you can change groupings in addition or multiplication, but NOT with subtraction or division!
The associative property only works for addition or multiplication - NOT subtraction and division.
This means you cannot regroup subtraction or division problems without changing the value of the solution.
It looks like Kate did more than just re-group things...
Kate did something tricky with the order of these numbers.
The commutative property deals with the order of  the terms in addition or multiplication operations.
The commutative property says that you can add the numbers involved in addition operations or multiply the numbers in multiplication operations in any order and not affect the value of  your answer.
The Commutative Property - You can change the order that terms are added or multiplied without changing the value of the answer.
Kate moved the halves together to make the addition easier.She moved the whole numbers together, and she didn’t have to mess around with improper fractions either.
The associative property says you can move parentheses around in addition or multiplication expressions without changing the answer.
Who am I?A bunch of equivalent expressions, in full costume, are playing a party game, “Who am I?” They’ll give you a clue, and, based on what they say, you try to guess what property they use.
Fill in the blanks to the right to identify the attendees.
Tonight’s attendees: Any of the charming properties you’ve seen so far just might show up...
Who am I?A bunch of equivalent expressions, in full costume, are playing a party game, “Who am I?” They’ll give you a clue, and, based on what they say, you try to guess what property they use.
Fill in the blanks to the right to identify the attendees.
Tonight’s attendees: Any of the charming properties you’ve seen so far just might show up...
Is everything all right? You look a little mixed up.
If  you have some additions or multiplications, I can move the numbers around without causing any problems.
I work with addition or multiplication too, but I’m not allowed to jiggle numbers around.
Commutative: Wait, aren’t parentheses the top of the food chain in the order of  operations?
I can’t mess with the order of  operations or change the answer, so I can only move parentheses around if  they are all around additions or multiplications.
I can’t change the answer, so I can only reorder numbers in addition or multiplication, too.
I guess you’re not allowed to do anything with division or subtraction either, right?
Subtracting or dividing changes the answer, so I can’t change those types of groupings.
Order is really important for subtraction and division, I guess, so I have to keep my hands off.
Associative: You know, I think we need to clear something up, as long as we’re chatting here.
Associative: That both of  us can be used outside of  the order of  operations without changing the answer.
I’m used to it, but I guess that can seem confusing.
We work any time! Addition or multiplication, they can be regrouped or reordered at any point when you’re simplifying.
The next round’s worth two points, which means the pressure’s on: you’ve got to judge the next problem correctly, or there’s going to be a real brawl over who wins tonight’s Math or No Math.
The problem’s worth a single point again, and there’s a bonus point for solving the problem as quickly as possible.
Not only that, but both Jack and Kate know about the order of  operations and the commutative and associative properties.
Jack got one point last round for getting the problem right, but Kate got 2 for being right and fast.
The Associative PropertyYou can change the grouping of terms with addition or multiplication without changing the outcome.
Mark up their work step by step to show how they each got their answer.
These numbers are what’s left after the denominators are canceled out.
All that was left was to do the exponent and then add and subtract.
Jack had to get all the fractions with the same denominators.
Mark up their work step by step to show how they each got their answer.
When you multiply everything in a group by the same numbers, you’re using the distributive property.
Let’s take a closer look at what exactly Kate did...
Here, Kate simplified each fraction by dividing out the denominators.
These factors are all that was left after the denominators were canceled out.
Are you kidding me? Every time we figure out how to judge these things, Kate pulls out another trick.
When you take a value and multiply over a grouping, you’re distributing that value.
The distributive property says that if  you have two groups multiplied together, you can simplify the groups, then multiply; or multiply first and then simplify.
Here’s the piece of  Kate’s work where she used the distributive property:
Distributing a value over a grouping doesn’t change a problem’s value.
Here’s the work if you simplify inside the parentheses first, and then multiply.
These two are the same working inside the parentheses first or multiplying first.
Q: Can we multiply before we do the parentheses? A: Yes.
If you have a situation where you’re multiplying two groups together, you can multiply and then simplify; or you can simplify and then multiply.
Q: Isn’t the distributive property ignoring the order of operations?
A: No, it’s just knowing when you can work around the order of operations.
Just like with the associative and commutative properties, the distributive property is about working with problems in a simpler, more efficient way.
And these properties work with the order of operations, not against them.
Q: What if there is subtraction or division inside the parentheses?
You just have to keep the same operators after you distribute a value that’s outside the parentheses.
If a number is subtracted inside the parentheses, it’s still subtracted after the distribution.
Q: So parentheses don’t have to go first? A: Not if you’re multiplying what’s in the parentheses by a number.
In that case, you can distribute the number over the grouping.
The 12 outside the parentheses is multiplied with each number inside the parentheses.
Take the expressions below and simplify them in two ways: by distributing, and by following the order of operations.
Which way do you think is faster for each problem?
Which way was faster? Why? Which way was faster? Why?
Which way was faster? Why? Which way was faster? Why?
Which way did you think was faster for each problem?
Which way was faster? Why? Which way was faster? Why?
Which way was faster? Why? Which way was faster? Why?
I think that using the order of operations was faster since there were fewer steps.
The order of operations was faster because the fractions went away.
I think that the distributive way was faster since all the fractions went away.
The order of operations was the faster way to go since the numbers worked out in the parentheses.
But, if the number inside had been huge, the distributive property would’ve been the way to go.
How am I supposed to remember all this? First there was the order of operations, and now there are all these rules...
You can memorize some general equations, not a lot of text.
Remembering all those sentences for each property is a pain...
But to do that, we need a way to represent numbers...
A constant stands in for a number A constant is a term used to describe an unknown in an equation that represents a number that doesn’t change.
In other words, a letter “a” on one side of  an equation is the same number as an “a” on the other side of  an equation.
Constants are great for turning specific problems into more general ones because we can use letters instead of  specific numbers.
The Commutative PropertyYou can change the order of the terms with addition or multiplication without changing the results.
At first, it might seem like these letters are just as hard to remember as a bunch of  sentences.
A general equation is just a way to remember rules that apply to all numbers in a certain situation.
The Associative Property You can change the grouping of terms with addition or multiplication without changing the outcome.
After going through Kate’s work, we figured out that she got all the problems right and was the fastest.
Kate solved the first question using the order of operations.
After seeing what happened with Jack, everybody can’t just go their own way, so the order of  operations is important.
Kate solved the second question using the associative and commutative properties before applying the order of operations.
Kate got done faster and smarter and could make the fractions much easier.
Kate got the third question right, faster, by using the distributive property first, and then the order of operations.
He learned the order of  operations from his first problem, but he needed some more properties up his sleeve to compete with Kate.
Jack got the first question wrong because he didn’t follow the order of operations.
Jack tried to solve the easiest parts of  the question first, regardless of  the order of  operations...
Jack got question two right by using the order of operations.
Unfortunately, Jack didn’t use the associative or commutative properties, so it took him longer than Kate to solve question two.
Jack got question three right, too, but he lost the speed competition again.
The order of  operations never let him down, but it slowed him down!
Propertycross Take some time to sit back and burn these properties into your brain.
It’s your standard crossword; all of the solution words are from this chapter.
Property that lets you multiply each term in a group by the value being multplied with the whole group.
Property that lets you multiply each term in a group by the value being multplied with the whole group.
Property that lets you multiply each term in a group by the value being multplied with the whole group [DISTRIBUTIVE]
Tools for your Algebra Toolbox This chapter was about numeric properties that are important to.
In this chapter, you’ll brush up on bases, roots, and radicals, all.
Now I only turn the TV on to catch the latest Lost episode.
To take it to the next level, she needs new equipment to deliver an even better podcast...
Addie’s got a website to host her podcasts, and she wants to advertise on her site to raise funds for new gear.
She’s lined up some possible sponsors, but they won’t help out until Addie proves she can get some real traffic on her site.
I’ve been producing my own Podcast, but now I need better quality gear...
Let’s mobilize Addie’s listeners Addie knows she’s got big fans.
Here’s a letter she’s worked up to send out to her 3 top listeners:
Please make sure that y ou visit the site today.
Ok - so the number of hits on day two is 2 threes multiplied together.
I keep trying to work this out with my calculator, but I keep losing count of how many threes I’ve put in.
Exponents are a shorthand way to show multiplication over and over again.
Exponents are a special notation used to express repeated multiplication.
That’s just what we need to figure out Addie’s number of  hits without counting a lot of threes: a way to show multiplying by 3 over and over.
When you see a number with an exponent, it looks like this:
Those two numbers are all you need to put in your calculator, and you’ll get the answer.
Rewrite Addie’s equation using exponent notation, and solve (using a calculator to get the number is a good idea)
Your job was to rewrite Addie’s equation using exponent notation, and solve.
Can Addie and Alex get enough hits? Alex has offered to send off  another round of  emails for Addie.
To figure out the total number of  hits, you’ll need to figure out how to add up both groups that Addie’s working with.
In chapter 2, you combined like terms to help Paul on his road trip, and this is the same idea.
You may remember from chapter 2 that a term is any part of  an equation held together with multiplication or division.
Since an exponent is just a shorthand version of multiplication, that means exponential terms with the same base and the same exponent are like terms.
With exponents, you can combine terms that have the same base.
Math Magnets Write the new equation for the number of hits that Addie and Alex will get.
Math Magnets Solution Write the new equation for the number of hits that Addie and Alex will get.
A term is something held together by multiplication, which means that the entire exponential term is treated as a group.
When you group two like terms together, you’re adding those terms together.
We’ve gone ahead and done the first one for you.
Is there anything else we can do with like bases?
That means they can be added, subtracted, multiplied, and divided.
What’s the final exponent? Count them up and fill this box in.
If you write it out, you can see how many factors you can divide out.
Well, that would work, but that’s a lot of threes...
Writing out the multiplication by hand will work; it’s just not very convenient.
Go back to writing the whole thing out if you need to, but you can figure it out!
For division, you can just subtract the denominator exponent from the numerator exponent (it’s just a quick way to figure out which ones you divided out)
Start by doing it the long way - it’s 16 threes.
Sorry, but I totally forgot to send out that email for your podcast until today.
Alex didn’t send out any emails to his friends until the third day.
That means he only has 12 days to get the word out.
Your job was to write the general form to combine like terms.
Do the exponential terms have the same base? Yes No.
Will Addie still have enough hits to make 5,000,000? Yes No.
Use x and y as bases and a and b as exponents.
So now, I really can just wait to hit 5,000,000
As soon as the ad company sees that in a couple of weeks I’m finally going to snag some gear.
Do the exponential terms have the same base? Yes No.
Will Addie still have enough hits to make 5,000,000? Yes No.
Since they don’t have the same exponent, they’re NOT like terms.
Use x and y as bases and a and b as exponents.
Q: : Why use exponents and not just multiplication? A: Because it can save you a bunch of work.
Writing out a value to multiply over and over again is tedious and leads to error.
And when the numbers start to get really big (like an exponent of 14), they are just impossible to deal with otherwise.
Q: Why do you need the same base and the same exponent to do addition and subtraction?
Because of the order of operations, you can’t add two multiplication expressions together without doing the multiplications first...
If the expressions are like terms, then you can collect them together into a single term.
That’s exactly what adding exponential terms with the same base and exponent does!
Q: Where are exponents in the order of operations? A: They’re second.
Since exponents are just a more powerful form of multiplication, they go before multiplication.
Q: How do you work with exponents with different bases? A: We’re going to be looking at those next.
But fair warning, there’s not much you can do to make those problems simpler.
If you have two bases, then there are two things that need to be multiplied, divided, or whatever.
There’s not a good way to combine terms like that since you’ve got to keep track of both bases separately.
Q: What happens if I’m dividing exponential terms and the exponent becomes negative?
A: Great question! When you divide exponential terms, you subtract the exponents.
This means that you could end up with a negative exponent.
The good news is that this is easy to deal with.
A negative exponent just means 1 over the positive exponential term.
The Movie Podcast heard about Addie’s plan to increase subsribers, and they don’t like it.
We need to fight back! Don’t go to the Startalk page, and email 4 Startalk users, telling them not to either.
If everybody emails 4 people, we’ll pull enough hits so that she won’t make it!
Every person that hits Movie Podcast’s page instead of Startalk Podcast’s page is taking away potential hits.
What does this mean for Addie’s chances to score a new sponsorship deal?
Since Movie Podcast is going to take away hits, how many will be left? Is Addie going to make it or is she in trouble?
If No, how many more hits does Addie need to get to 5,000,000?
Will Addie still have enough hits to make 5,000,000? Yes No.
Since Movie Podcast is going to take away hits, how many will be left? Is Addie going to make it, or is she in trouble?
If No, how many more hits does Addie need to get to 5,000,000?
Will Addie still have enough hits to make 5,000,000? Yes No.
Addie needs to come up with over 700,000 new hits!
Less what she has now (thanks to the folks at Movie Podcast)
Movie Podcast made enough of a dent to push Addie below the numbers she needs.
These are the same from earlier same base but different exponent.
The new term has a different base AND a different exponent.
Since Addie and Alex sent theirs out to the same number of folks, they have the same base.
Movie Podcast sent it out to more people with less time.
That’s why we have three different variables listed for the exponents.
Since those terms have different bases, they can’t be combined as variables, right?
Terms with different bases are not like terms (regardless of  the exponent)
As exponential terms, they’re not multiplying the same number, regardless of  how many times.
As we saw earlier, they’re only like terms if the base AND the exponent are the same.
You can’t add exponents with different bases If  we just talk about the bit of  Addie’s equation that has two terms, it looks like this:
You know that you can’t add or subtract these two because they’re not like terms.
Exponential terms being multiplied together just get written together, like this:
These are all same thing, just written differently, but you can’t combine them at all.
Why can’t we just mush everything all together, like (xy)bc?
Q: Do I really have to memorize all of these rules for working with exponents?
A: No, because you can always work through these equations by working out each term separately.
But if you can remember these rules, you’ll be able to combine like terms and solve equations more quickly.
It’s much easier to combine terms and do one calculation.
That’s a lot better than working out a ton of terms separately, especially if the terms can be combined because they’re like terms.
Q: What if the bases are different and the exponents are the same?
A: Well, there’s a little bit you can do there.
If the exponents are the same, then each term is being multiplied the same number of times, so you CAN mush them together, like this: It only works because of the commutative and associative properties.
This is all just multiplication, so you can mix up the order, and it will still work.
Q: So what about that Brain Power?  How could you show it without solving the math?
The order of operations says exponents FIRST You can’t split up bases and combine different exponents because each base has to stay with its own exponent.
The order of  operations says that exponents go before multiplication.
That means the exponents have to be simplified before they can be combined with something else.
I can’t lose that sponsorship, or who knows how many subscribers I’ll lose, too.
But how many does she need to send out? Addie has only 9 days left and she needs to figure out how many emails she needs to start with today to make up for the campaign that Movie Podcast’s running.
We’ve got to work our exponent “backward” Let’s go back to Addie’s equation.
We’ve got different information this time: the number of  hits we need and the number of  days left:
What do I do with that? I can’t solve for a base.
A root is the INVERSE of an exponent We need an operation that can unravel an exponent.
So when we have the exponent, what’s the base to get a certain answer? Well, that’s the root.
When you find a root of  something, you’re finding the number that can be multiplied over and over to reach the final number.
For Addie, we need take the ninth root of  both sides of  her equation.
That will isolate x and give us a numeric value on the other side.
How did you figure out that crazy root? Do you have to be some sort of timestable genius?
Look closely—you can punch any root of  any number in there and get a solution.
If  you wanted to read this, you’d say, “The second root of  nine is three.” The actual root is three, and it’s the number that you multiply twice by itself  to find the number under the radical.
So, to find the ninth root for Addie, all you need is a calculator.
We know this side needs to be x because the root and the exponent are the same, and they cancel each other out.
Ask a teacher, or look this up in your calculator’s instructions.
How many more emails does Addie need to send out? Is there any way she can pull this off?
Is there any way she can pull it off? Yes No.
How many more emails does Addie need to send out? Is there any way she can do it?
Punch this into your calculator and you’ll get a number you can use.
She needs to send out 5 emails in the first round.
Addie can also recruit more of Alex’s friends if she needs people to send mail to.
You’ve helped Addie land a big check! Addie’s site cleared 5,000,000 hits, no problem.
Her sponsorship deals on, the subscribers are pouring in, and Addie’s off  to get some great new gear from her local Apple store.
Is there any way she can pull it off? Yes No.
This number goes on and on, but this is enough to get the idea.
This is another one of those situations where you need to think about the context of the problem.
Q: Just put the problem in a calculator? Is that for real?
A: There are actually several ways to find roots of numbers.
There are tables where you can look them up, there’s even a way to find them by hand that looks like long division.
Then you can get an idea of what numbres might at least be close to what you’re looking for.
Q: What if I see a radical without an index number?
It’s convention that if there isn’t an index, then the equation is talking about the square root.
That simply means you should take the root of the base.
For example, if you see 1/2 as an exponent, it means square root.
Q: My calculator doesn’t have a 9th root button, what do I do?
So you could just put in a root of (1/9) and get the same answer.
Q: Will I ever need to solve for an exponent and not the base?
There are more operations out there that you can use to do this sort of problem, but they’re well beyond this book.
Why? If you go back to the division of exponents, you subtract the bottom exponent from the top exponent.
If you end up with the same term on the top and the bottom, then it’s the base to the 0 power.
That means an exponent of one is implied over EVERY number and EVERY variable.
Q: Can an exponent be negative? A: Yes - it means that it’s the exponent in the denominator.
Since there’s no exponent in the numerator, it’s a negative exponent.
Q: Can you use negative exponents to get rid of fractions?
If you have an expression with fractions in it, you just rewrite the expression with the denominators as negative exponents.
This really only helps if you find working with exponents easier than working with fractions.
Of course, some people prefer that, and it’s a perfectly okay way to work.
This also works the other way: if you think fractions are easier than exponents, just pull out all your negative exponents and rewrite them as fractions.
A: When we talk about finding roots, we’re actually talking about finding the principle root.
Exponentcross Raise yourself! Can you get all the words? They’re all from this chapter.Untitled Puzzle.
We’ve written the exponent operations that we’ve been talking about in terms of  general variables.
We’ve written the exponent operations that we’ve been talking about in terms of  general variables.
Since these are not the same base and the same exponent, there’s nothing else you can do.
Raising an exponent to an exponent is just more multiplication.
Subtraction works here because you have the same base and the same exponent.Just combine.
These are not the same base or the same exponent, so there’s nothing you can do here, either.
There are a few different ways to do this one too - come up with two if you can.
Try and come up with two ways to approach this one.
These numbers can’t be added without being the same exponent and the same base.
All there is to do is simplify the exponents and then add them.
When you multiply exponents, you can add them up first.
The thing to remember to do here is subtract the exponents.
The result is that you will get a negative exponentR ewrite the fractions as negative.
There are a few different ways to do this one too.
Then, just treat that negative exponent as a denominator (fractional notation or decimal both work)
You can recognize them as like terms as fractions and add them first, then simplify.
You could simplify them first, without taking advantage of exponent rules.
These are the general forms for exponential operations for exponential terms of the same base and different bases.
Tools for your Algebra Toolbox This chapter was about numeric properties that are important to.
I’ll capture a lot more than a smile with this snapshot, just you watch.
Ever looked at an equation and thought, “But what the heck does that mean?”
In times like that, you just might need a visual representation of your equation.
They let you look at an equation, instead of just.
You can see where important points are on the graph, like when.
In fact, with graphs, you can make smart decisions with your equations.
Edward has been running his own lawn mowing and bush trimming business for a couple of  years now.
Edward has a list of  new things that he wants to buy so he can expand his business—he’s thinking long term.
He’d like to find out when he’ll be able to purchase each of  these items:
I’ve got to do some planning, but I’ve got no idea how to do that...
Edward needs help to SEE what his financial future looks like.
Ed wants you to help him plan out when he can make future purchases, help him decide how fast he needs to add clients, and get his business financials organized.
You have all of  Ed’s information, his income and his clients, and a list of  things he wants to buy.
Using the information that Ed has given you, figure out the general equation for his income over the next weeks and months.
Just do your best, and turn the page when you’re through.
Using the information that Ed has given you, figure out the general equation for his income over the next weeks and months.
Ed’s cash = all lawns in a week times cost per lawn times weeks.
This is how much Ed has made over some length of time, call it “C.”
This is what changes, we’ll call it “t” (for time)
Now Ed can know what his cash is at ANY time The general equation that you’ve written can work in two different ways because you have two variables.
If  Ed has a time when he wants to know how much money he’ll have, you just substitute that time for t, and solve for C.
Or,  if  Ed knows how much money he wants, you can tell him when he’ll get there by substituting the amount in for C and solving for t.
Just substitute the value of  the hedge trimmer in for C and solve for t.
This is how many weeks Ed needs to cut lawns to get his hedge trimmer.
But what about the blade sharpener? Or the bagger? I need to know when I can start thinking about those, too.
Figure out how many weeks it will take for Ed to earn enough for the blade sharpener or the bagger attachment.
Then Ed will have an idea of what he can do.
Well, it makes sense that it would take the longest to save for this one, the bagger is $504
Great, we get it, okay? And if Ed wants a edger, we do it again.
Figure out how many weeks it will take for Ed to earn enough for the blade sharpener or the bagger attachment.
Then Ed will have an idea of what he can do.
We plug in how much cash Ed needs, and then solve for number of weeks, t.
Ok, so 4 weeks to save up for the blade sharpener.
Why don’t you just SHOW me the money? What if  we could come up with a way where we could look up a value, like the amount an accessory costs, and then see what t was for that amount? In fact, there is a way to show all the possible “what if ’s” that you can have for an equation.
A graph allows you to draw all of  the possible points for an equation and then look up different points as you need them.
Then you can see how much money Ed will have at any given time and tell him if  he can afford something, without having to solve that same equation again and again.
Let’s start by taking the information we know and drawing it on a grid:
Plot the other two points to see if you can get a better idea of what’s going on.
We can draw these points - called plotting points on a grid.
How does a bunch of dots help me? I still don’t see any way to find out when Ed wants to buy something that’s worth, say, $245
What about points that aren’t plotted yet? We need to find values for dots that aren’t yet on the grid.
If you draw a line that connects all of  those dots, you’ll be able to use it to figure out different time and cost values.
Like, say, when Ed can afford that $245 pair of  noise canceling ear buds he’s been checking out.
Let’s draw a line, and then look up where $245 crosses our line.
Graphs show an ENTIRE relationship Once we add the line to the picture of  the points that we’ve figured out, it turns out we’ve drawn a graph of  the relationship between C (Ed’s cash) and t (the number of  weeks he’s been cutting grass):
There’s something else that covers the entire relationship We also have an equation that covers the entire relationship between C and t:
It shows us the equation and lets us look at how C and t are related.
On top of  that, this graph shows a trend for the equation: the general direction that the relationship is heading.
That means he’s going to have made more money as time goes on (meaning he’ll keep moving lawns, save more cash, and so on)
Now, when Ed wants to buy something, he can just look up the value for C he wants.
Use your cash-flow graph for Ed to figure out when he can make some future purchases.
You should not need to do ANY computations this time - the graph.
How long until Ed can get those $245 noise canceling ear buds?
Ed is thinking he’s going to need a new blade.
Don’t get freaked out about exact numbers here - just get to the closest week.
Q: Is the graph of the equation the line or the points?
A line is made up of an infinite number of points.
So the points that we computed for Ed were just a few from the relationship.
Once we draw a line, that’s the graph of the entire equation.
Graphs and equations are just different ways of showing the same thing.
Q: How do I know where to plot my points if they don’t fall on an exact line on the grid?
A: Don’t stress! Just look at the numbers on the axis (that’s the line at the edge of the graph that tells you what numbers go on what grid line) and estimate where your point should go.
As long as you’re consistent about being close, the graph will be good enough to use.
Another thing to think about is that graphs won’t always be as big as Ed’s is.
Q: What’s is exactly is a trend again? A: A trend is just the general direction of a line.
If a graph is heading upward, that means that as one variable increases, so does the other.
And if the line is heading downhill, as one variable increases, the other variable decreases.
Q: How do I know which number to plot using the bottom axis, and which number to plot with the side axis?
A: Usually, each axis on your graph is labeled, like “time” or “number of weeks” or.
If not, you should label them! If your equation is in terms of x and y, then the x is horizontal and the y is vertical.
In the case where your variables are different, hang on—you’ll be learning how to identify the structure of a linear equation, and then you’ll be able to see which variable is acting like the x and is horizontal.
Q: Can a graph show any variables? A: Just like with equations, you can use any variable you want.
Q: Do we have to figure out the points first every time? Or can we just draw the line right away somehow?
We’re going to learn some methods that you can use that don’t require ANY computations at all.
Then, you’ll be able to graph an equation by just looking at the equation.
Q: Can a graph show any variables? A: Just like with equations, you can use any variable you want.
A graph and an equation are just different ways of looking at a relationship between two variables.
How long until Ed can get those $245 noise canceling ear buds?
Ed is thinking he’s going to need a new blade.
Use your cash-flow graph for Ed to figure out when he can make some future purchases.
You should not need to do ANY computations this time - the graph.
For the ear buds start at $245 here and read down off the line.
Ok great, now I can see what’s coming up and plan some expansion.
Just by looking, you can let Ed know the details about when he can afford things.
Now he’s going to get started with his mowing season and save up to buy new lawn accessories.
Ed can’t afford to lose all of  his customers this early in the summer.
Even though Ed only gets $12 a yard, Ed’s desperate, so he’ll have to make up the difference on each lawn out of  his own pocket.
A new situation needs a new equation Ed need to know how much money he’s got in the bank and how long he can afford to pay his brother.
Can Ed afford to pay his brother and keep his customers? You need to work up a new graph showing Ed’s new situation—paying money instead of  making money—for 10 weeks.
Will Ed run out of money before his cast comes off? This is only a 10 week situation, but Ed doesn’t have a ton of  cash.
At the end of  the 10 weeks, what will Ed have left?
Ed has 3 weeks worth of lawn mowing money in the bank now...
You need to figure out what Ed has, what it will cost him to hire out his brother, and when Ed will run out of money.
Use C and t like we did before - but you also need to keep in mind how much money Ed started with and subtract what he’ll spend.
If Ed will still be in a cast, how can you figure out how far into debt he’ll go? Just jot down some ideas - no numbers or anything - of ways you could figure it out.
If we solve the equation for C = 0, the t will be when that happens.
This decimal goes on for a while, but it doesn’t matter.
What you’re after is the number of weeks, so 5 is the answer we need.
Ed’s cast is staying on for 10 weeks, so he’s only going to be halfway through that before he’s out of money.
There’s no wrong answer here - we just wanted to get you thinking...
You need to figure out what Ed has, what it will cost him to hire out his brother, and when Ed will run out of money.
If he’ll still be in a cast, how can you figure out how far into debt he’ll go?
How can I see how far into debt I’m going? Can you make me another graph?
You need one more point, so you can draw a line.
Try setting t = 0; it’s easy to solve for.
Once you plot those two points, you can just draw the line, and that’s the graph of the equation.
You need one more point so you can draw a line.
Try setting t = 0; it’s easy to solve for.
Ed gets his cast off at week 10 - so how much will he owe? Can we read this off the graph?
We need to expand the graph to read that last value, right? If the C values went lower, that would work...
The Cartesian Plane allows values to go BELOW zero Lots of  graphs need to show negative numbers.
The math standard for a graph is called the Cartesian Plane.
Using the Cartesian Plane, both of  the axis values can go negative, which means your values can also be negative, or less than zero.
This is the origin, the very center of the graph.
Quadrant one is where all of the values for the graph are positive.
Quadrant four is where the x values are positive and the y values are negative.
Quadrant three is where all the values are negative - x and y.
Quadrant two is where the x values are negative and the y values are positive.
Let’s graph Ed’s equation on the Cartesian Plane Just because we started with a smaller portion of  the plane for Ed’s graph doesn’t mean we need to stay there.
If  we put Ed’s graph on the Cartesian Plane, we’ll be able to read off  the value we need and figure out how far Ed is going to go into debt.
When we first started with Ed’s graphs, we just made up a grid and plotted the points we knew.
Each point was actually an ordered pair: one number followed by another number.
The first number is the horizontal number, the second is for the vertical, and the parentheses say the numbers are connected.
So each point for Ed’s graph is (t, C), where t is time, and C is Ed’s cash:
Ed’s graph has two INTERCEPT points A linear equation is an equation that expresses a relationship between two variables—like the relationship between Ed’s cash and time.
The line that represents a linear equation has points where it crosses the x-axis and y-axis, called intercepts.
Where C = 0 is the t-intercept, which is where the line crosses the t-axis.
And where t = 0 is the value for the C-intercept, where the line crosses the C axis.
These intercepts are usually called x- or y-intercepts because x and y are the standard labels for the horizontal and vertical axis lines.
Hey, how can you just extend the lines into those other quadrants? We don’t have any points to plot over there.
Draw a straight line through (and past) your two points.
Lines go on forever in both directions, so the line you draw has to go past both of  your plotted points.
The arrows indicate that the line goes past the part of  the equation represented on your graph.
After you’ve figured out any two points for an equation, you can draw a line through those points, and you’ve graphed your linear equation.
It makes sense that two points make a line, but why? Because to be a specific line, you need a point and a direction.
If  you plot just one point, you can draw lines in all different directions that go through that point.
Once you’ve picked a second point, you know which direction that line has to go to hit both of  them.
A linear equation is an equation that defines a line.
That means any equation of  this type, when you graph it, will produce a line.
You can identify a linear equation by looking at it: if  it has one or two variables, those variables have an exponent of  1, and all of  the terms are constants or constants multiplied by variables, it’s a linear equation.
Once you have looked at an equation and determined that it’s linear, plot two points and draw your line.
Start by setting one variable to 0, and solve for the other variable.
Then flip the variables: assign the second one to zero, and solve for the first.
Then you can draw a line through the intercepts, and you’ve got your graph!
The terms are all either one of the two variables multiplied by a constant or just a constant.
Q: Why are intercepts such a big deal? A: Because they are one of those things that makes life easier.
Ever noticed that when you throw a zero into the mix, equations seem to get easier? Since the x- and y- intercepts both allow you to set one coordinate in an equation to zero, they make finding a point to plot pretty easy.
Q: I’ve heard of a table of values, what is that all about?
A: A table of values is a more formal way of solving an equation to get points to use on a graph.
Typically, you set up a table with columns for the x value, the y value, and the equation.
You plug in values for x and solve for y, and then vice versa.
In fact, that’s a lot like we did with Ed...
The big difference between using a table of values and solving just for the intercepts is speed.
You’re only solving for two, easy-tofind points with intercepts, and that’s usually pretty quick to do.
A: That’s a 3D graph, and we won’t be doing any of that! You don’t need to worry about those types of graphs in Algebra.
Q: Is there a way to check my graph? A: Yes.
The easiest way is to solve for another point and make sure that it’s on your line.
For our example, if you substitute x = -1 and solve for y, the y-value you come up with should be on your line.
A: This standard form of a grid was created by a guy named Rene Descartes in 1637 as part of his work to merge Algebra and Geometry.
It works perfectly since we’re going to be creating shapes (like lines) that can be described by Algebraic equations.
A: That’s just the standard way all mathematicians talk about graphs—using roman numerals.
A: Yes, typically x is the horizontal axis, and y is the vertical.
Ed’s equation used C and t, and that was okay, too.
The Cartesian Plane just shows a relationship between two variables.
You can either swap out the variables in your equation for x and y, or you can re-label each axis in the graph.
The typical variables for a graph are x for the horizontal axis, and y for the vertical axis.
Using the full Cartesian plane, read Ed’s graph to figure out how much he’s going to owe 10 weeks from now.
After Ed’s cast comes off, he’s going to go back to earning $84 a week.
How long is it going to take him to get out of debt?
To solve this, you have to go back to Ed’s original equation, C = 84t.
Using the full Cartesian plane, read Ed’s graph to figure out how much he’s going to owe 10 weeks from now.
After Ed’s cast comes off, he’s going to go back to earning $84 a week.
How long is it going to take him to get out of debt?
Well, 3 weeks wasn’t too long, and now that my cast is off, maybe.
I can get more customers and make up for my lame start.
He’s into June and healed up, but he owes money and wants to make up for lost time.
Ed’s created a new form where he details each lawn, so he can give potential customers new quotes.
Ed’s focusing on how hilly lawns are, so he can charge more based on how steep a lawn is.
Ed’s figuring out the SLOPE of lawns To make sure he’s consistent in figuring out how steep a lawn is, Ed’s developed a system.
He starts at the street and measures some key features of  the lawn.
Then he puts that information together and turns his information into a number for the slope of  a lawn.
How far up (or down) from the street the hill goes.
Figure out the slope for each of  Ed’s new clients and how much he’s going to charge.
Figure out the slope for each of  Ed’s new clients and how much he’s going to charge.
These slopes are just lines on a graph, right? So don’t those lines represent equations, too?
When linear equations are written a certain way, they have a particular form.
The form is just the order of the variables, numbers, and operations.
Sometimes a form has two points, and sometimes it has an intercept and a slope.
But no matter what form of  a linear equation you’re looking at, every line has a slope, intercepts, no exponents greater than one, and two variables.
Understanding the forms just means knowing how to interpret the equations and write them in different ways.
In fact, if  you know one point on a line and the slope of  a line, you can write out the equation for that line.
Linear equations in point-slope form The point-slope form of  a linear equation represents an equation as a point on the line and the slope of  the line.
So as long as you know a line’s slope and one point on the line, you can use the point-slope form:
These terms probably look a little weird and are a little confusing.
Are they variables or constants? And what are those little numbers?
The little 1’s below and to the side are called subscripts.
They indicate a specific value of  x and y, and since the subscripts are the same, they indicate that those x and y values go together.
It can be an intercept, but it doesn’t have to be.
With any single point you can still write the equation.
Since they’re a point on a graph, they are also constants, not variables.
So in the point-slope form, you’re taking an ordered pair that represents a point on the line and splitting the two numbers of  that pair up in the equation.
There’s a lot going on here, though, so let’s take a closer look.
The number of units right or left (negative run means go left)
The number of units up or down (negative rise means down)
How does a point and a slope get you a line? You’ve actually already seen how to figure out slope.
We used the idea of  rise over run to figure out slopes for Ed’s yard estimates:
Interpret the slope and use it to plot the second point.
If  you just go up the rise, and over the run you can plot the point you land on, and then draw your line.
And you’ve already got one point on the line, so here’s what you do to draw the entire line:
If  you start with the point-slope equation, that means your point is:
Ed knows two points for his lawns, so we could pick whichever one we want to use for the pointslope form of an equation.
Just because it’s Algebra doesn’t mean it’s complicated and weird.
These concepts can be much easier to learn with more basic terms.
Saying that a negative slope is downhill just makes sense, right?
Q: Why is the slope so important? A: Every line is defined by some type of slope.
If you have a negative slope or a positive slope, you’ll know if  y goes up or down with x.
For example, Edward saves more money (C) as time (t) goes on.
Q: Do we need to memorize the form of the point-slope equation?
The run is the difference between the values of two x coordinates.
That means if you see addition signs in the pointslope equation, you’re dealing with a negative coordinate value, not a positive one.
Try graphing a couple of point-slope equations using what you know about form to make it easy!
Try graphing a couple of point-slope equations using what you know about form to make it easy!
The x coordinate is negative because it’s added in the equation.
What about Ed’s lawns? Do we know enough about to write an equation for them now?
We sure do! With just one point and the slope that you’ve already figured out, we have enough to write equations for those lawns.
Let’s use the point-slope form If  you take Ed’s first lawn and use the information you’ve already figured out, you can write the equation for that line with no additional calculations:
We can just take the values we know from here...
The same holds true for any line for which you know a point and the slope.
You’ll end up with an added value in the equation for the line.
Write the equations for the other two lawns that Ed evaluated in point-slope form.
Write the equations for the other two lawns that Ed evaluated in point-slope form.
This is the point where the graph starts, at the street.
So now what do we do? With a 0 slope, everything’s messed up.
Horizontal lines require a different form Ed is looking at a nice, flat lawn.
The rise of  the line is 0, so it doesn’t matter what the run is because the slope will still come out to be zero.
Writing an equation that describes a horizontal line like this is actually pretty simple.
Since all of  the y values are the same (2 in this case), you can just write:
So how do we express an equation for that line? Well, we know that the equation will have to be in terms of x and/or y somehow, but what about slope? How does a zero-slope work?
So since the slope is zero, what happens to x? It can’t be zero, too, right?
If  you have a coefficient of  a variable that’s zero, the variable will disappear.
Equations also have a standard form There’s a form of  a linear equation called the standard form.
A horizontal line is a very specific case in which point-slope won’t work, but there’s a more general form.
The standard form actually takes both y and x into account and works when the slope of  a line is zero:
And a, b, and c do not stand for anything relating to a graph, either.
So this form isn’t quite so easy to turn into a graph.
But that’s okay because this equation handles every type of  line, no matter what.
That’s right! Any other form of  a linear equation can be turned into the standard form.
So we can turn the earlier equation, y = 2, into the ax + by = c form.
Are there any other forms we need to know about?
The last equation form that’s left is similar to point-slope in what it contains.
This last form comes with a point and a slope within the equation.
This form includes the y-intercept, so it’s called the slope-intercept form.
The slope-intercept form is EASY to graph Not only that, but slope-intercept comes with the same constant for slope, m.
So m is the slope, just like it was earlier.
On top of  that, x and y are still variables, like all the other forms of  linear equations.
Slope intercept equation - A linear equation of the form y = mx + b where m is the slope of the line and b is the coordinate for the y term of the y-intercept.
This is the same slope we’ve been talking about rise over run.
To draw this line, just plot the y-intercept at (0, b) and then find your second point using the slope, m, just like you did before.
Point-slope form This form has a lot going for it.
It gives you a quick point to plot, and it gives you a slope, so you can plot the rest of  the line.
The downside is that if  you need to manipulate this form, you’ll have to use a lot of distribution and parentheses, and the constants aren’t together, either.
Point-slope is great for graphing, but not for manipulating the equation.
Standard form Standard form is straightforward—x and y both have a coefficient, and there’s another extra constant.
This form works for all lines, and it’s an easy equation to manipulate.
Graphing is tough with standard form because you don’t have a slope or a point to start with.
The only way to graph this form is to solve for a couple of  points and then plot those points and draw a line.
Slope-intercept form This form gives you the y-intercept, and it gives you a slope so you can plot the rest of  the line.
It’s easy to manipulate, and it gives you a point right away.
However, if  the y-intercept for the graph is really high or really low, it can make graphing the line really tough.
Slope-intercept is great for graphing lines that cross the y-axis near the origin and is pretty easy to manipulate.
This is a negative slope - the rise is a negative number.
Standard form is easy to manipulate but hard to graph.
That helps, but to see what an equation really looks like, though, we need to graph it, huh?
Use the equation form to your advantage You know enough now to look at an equation and graph it, if  it’s a point-slope or slope intercept equation.
That means most of  the time no computation is required! Just draw.
You can look at an equation and graph it if you know the form.
You can tell, just by looking at an equation, what the graph will be?
But what kind? You can’t really just pull numbers out of the equation and treat them like points.
But how do we know what these things will look like? Are they really going to be lines?
Yeah - if there’s an x and a y without squared terms or anything, it’s a line.
Yeah - as long as you know what form you’re looking at.
Here’s how I remember: point-slope has parentheses, slope-intercept has x and y on opposite sides, but no parentheses, and standard form has x and y together.
All of the points have 7 as their x value.
This means the y value for your point is -2
Q: Why does m stand for slope? A: Nobody really knows.
There are ideas about “modulus” or maybe it’s just because it’s a letter in the middle of the alphabet.
Q: Why do we use “b” for the y-intercept? A: Well, that’s another mystery, like slope.
In modern day math, several other countries use different letters for the y-intercept, like k, n, or h.
Q: If x and y are on the same side of the equation, can the equation still be in slope-intercept form?
A: Sure, but you’ll have to manipulate the equation to get it in the form y = mx +b.
The signs can be different, but that just means that the constant is a negative number.
Q: Why are m and b constants but x and y variables? How can you tell when a letter is a variable and not a constant?
A: The constants are what will appear as numbers in a typical situation.
When you learn a standard form of an equation (like slope-intercept), you know now that m and b are constants because they’ll always be the same in the equation.
And here’s another clue when looking at a new equation: the coordinate plane is based on x and y, making them variables.
Q: If m is a whole number, then what’s the “run” of “rise over run”?
A: Think back to your fractions! Any whole number is the same as a fraction with the whole number in the numerator and one in the denominator.
A: The form of the equation is just the arrangement of variables and constants.
For example, in a point-slope equation, you have to have the y isolated on one side of the equation and an x term on the right for it to be in point-slope form.
Q: What if I have an equation like y = x? Is that in any special form?
And since you have an m and a b, you’re ready to plot your graph.
Q: When would you start with a graph and need to write the equation?
When you have a plot of actual data—financial data or experimental data—and you need to write a line to generalize what’s happening, you’ll have a graph before you have an equation.
Q: You can really just figure out the slope and the intercept and write an equation?
Everybody knows that the coefficient for the x term is the slope, and the constant that’s added onto the equation is the y-coordinate of the y-intercept.
I’ve been cutting those three new lawns for 2 weeks now.
More people want quotes, and it’s too much for me to keep up with, so my brother’s going to help.
To make up for taking all of Ed’s money early in the summer, his brother is going to work for free to finish the season.
Ed has been evaluating his lawns based on drawings and deciding how steep the slope is,  but his brother decided to get creative.
He’s using a “new system” and when he turns the form in to Ed it has equations for the lawns instead of  the pictures.
I can’t work this way - I need his stuff in pictures so I can decide how much to charge.
Your job is to convert each equation to a form that you can graph.
Then, graph each equation so Ed can get these customers estimates.
This is what his brother was supposed to fill in.
Your job is to convert each equation to a form that you can graph.
Then, graph each equation so Ed can get these customers estimates.
This is what his brother was supposed to fill in.
So what’s the final amount I’ll end up with after all these new yards?
Ed’s had a busy summer—and not all of  it good.
He started out strong, broke his leg, had to pay his brother crazy amounts just to keep his customers, but then things started to turn around with a bunch of  clients.
Ed broke his leg and had to spend the following 10 weeks in a cast.
He’s going to cut all of  the lawns for the rest of  the summer—6 weeks.
How much is Ed going to end up making? If you need some help, turn the page for a few hints...
Figure out how much Ed is going to make by the end of the summer.
Draw him a graph to show his cash projections for the next 22 weeks (that’s how long his plan runs)
You need to write an equation and plot a graph for this part!
Write Ed’s cash equation for the end of the summer:
How much will Ed end up with at the end of the summer?
Your job was to figure out how much Ed is going to make by the end of the summer, and draw him a graph to show his cash projections for the next 22 weeks (that’s how long his plan runs)
You need to write an equation and plot a graph for this part!
This is in the y = mx + b form - easy to plot!
This is a lot like Ed’s early equation, but he’s now making more money a week.
Write Ed’s cash equation for the end of the summer:
I’m going to take the graph you made and make some plans!
A picture might also be worth 1,000 bucks! Sometimes an equation has a lot to say about the future.
In fact, an equation can tell Ed how much to save, how many yards to mow, even how a particular yard will profit his business.
But sometimes you need more than a bunch of  numbers and letters.
In those cases, a graph can help you see your equation...
How much will Ed end up with at the end of the summer?
If there’s a line, graph it! If there’s a graph, find the equation for the line.
If there’s a line, graph it! If there’s a graph, find the equation for the line.
Be careful: the sign changed because it’s a negative three.
Tools for your Algebra Toolbox This chapter was about graphing equations.
This is the origin, the very center of the graph.
Quadrant one is where all of the values for the graph are positive.
Quadrant two is where the x values are negative and the y values are positive.
Quadrant three is where all the values are negative, both x and y.
Quadrant four is where the x values are positive and the y values are negative.
I should have been enough, but I came up just short.
Have you ever thought, “I just need a little bit more”? But what if someone gave.
Kathleen really loves football Kathleen wants to start her own fantasy football team but needs your help managing it.
Each team is limited to spending no more than $1,000,000 on player salaries.
Your job is to help Kathleen put together a balanced team.
Each team can spend $1,000,000, but I need to spread that out over my defense, some offensive players, and a quarterback.
For defense, you get to buy a whole team as a unit, not just single players.
Here are the team and player lists you can pick from to put together Kathleen’s team.
Using the team price equation below, can you come up with a team that works? If not, why? Is there a problem with the equation?
Using the team price equation below, can you come up with a team that works? If not, why? Is there a problem with our equation?
The problem with using an equals sign is that there isn’t a combination of players that will equal exactly $1,000,000..
We don’t need exactly $1,000,000; the team just can’t cost any more than that.
The cost of  the entire team just needs to be less than or equal to $1,000,000
What we need is a way to show that the cost can be less than that amount, just not more than it.
When you have a comparison, you use something different than an equals sign.
So the < sign compares one side of the equation to the other, right?
The = sign means “equal to,” and you already know how it works.
It means both sides of  an equation are the same:
That means that the two sides aren’t equal, but there is still a relationship.
An inequality can be written with one of  four symbols.
They all express a different relationship: greater than, less than, greater than or equal to, and less than or equal to.
They will appear in an equation exactly where you would expect to see an equals sign:
Inequalities are COMPARISONS The inequality symbols provide a way to compare two numbers, or two sets of  numbers.
Let’s take a look a the number line, which is a great way to see the relationships between numbers.
Numbers are smaller as you go to the left of  the line, and they get bigger on the right.
The number to the left on the number line is always the smallest.
Remember, this is “less than or equal to,” so since 10=10, this is true.
Write an inequality using the money Kathleen has already spent and figure out what’s the most she could spend on her quarterback.
To isolate the variable, perform the inverse operation, just like you would with an equation.
Hey - what about my team? I’ve made a bunch of picks, but I still need a quarterback.
We did exactly the same math as if it had been an equals sign.
Let q be how much Kathleen can spend on her quarterback.
Q: Why do we need inequalities? A: An inequality is a lot more realistic in many situations.
If you only need to find out if you have enough gas, any amount of gas over what you need is fine.
Q:What’s the difference between “less than” and “less than or equal to”?
Q: Same deal with “‘greater than” and “greater than or equal to”?
So do inequality signs always work just like an equals sign?
We’ll get into more detail later, but as long as you’re only doing addition and subtraction, the inequality behaves just as an equality.
Q: What do you mean, not always? A: With multiplication and division of negative integers, things can get interesting.
We’ll talk more about that in just a few pages.
Q: Does this inequality thing really help? I mean, having a whole mess of answers doesn’t seem very exact.
What is important to understand is that when you’re dealing with many real-world situations, you don’t need a single number.
You actually need to know all the numbers that would work.
Algebra is able to deal with many more complex situations than traditional arithmetic, and this is one of them.
Part of Algebra is manipulating expressions to figure out the solution, but you also have to check that your solution actually makes sense.
Q: When do you use a number line? A: Any time you feel like you’re not quite sure about a comparison or how to analyze your answer.
We’ll revisit number lines later in the chapter as a way to show the entire solution set.
Q: An equation usually has a set number of solutions, right? How many solutions do inequalities have?
You’re trying to find the boundaries: the highest or lowest values that are allowed.
And remember, just because there might be an infinite number of mathematically correct solutions, it doesn’t always mean all those values make sense in the real world.
Q: With equality, it means the same thing on both sides.
By reading the inequality symbol that is used in the expression, you can figure out exactly what the relationship is between two sides.
Inequalities involving some negative number operations need special treatment Kathleen still needs a good quarterback, but there’s another way she can stack the deck in her favor.
The fantasy football league she’s in allows you to handicap another team by buying “penalty points” before a game.
For every penalty point she buys, the opposing team loses ten yards of  offense when they play her team.
I’m playing my brother’s team next, so I want a safety net for the upcoming game.
Since Kathleen said she wants at least 50 yards, we’ve got an inequality.
We can let g be the number of  penalty points Kathleen needs to buy, and we have this inequality:
And Kathleen wants her brother to start out at -50 yards.
To solve this, we need to  divide both sides by -10:
What could Kathleen have said to make this an equality instead?
There is so much wrong here; I don’t even know where to start.
Negative inequalities work BACKWARD First let’s deal with the “at least” part of  the problem.
Kathleen wants at least 50 yards taken off  of  her opponent’s offense.
Since numbers on the left of  the number line are less than numbers on the right, the expression we’re trying to solve has to be less than -50
Whatever the left side of  our inequality comes out to be, it has to be less than or equal to -50
Multiplication and division of negative numbers causes problems for inequalities So now we need to figure out what went wrong at the end when we solved for g.
The reason that the inequality doesn’t work with negative numbers is simple: negative numbers are backward.
But, since it’s negative, it’s way less than zero, and it’s value is small.
The end result of  all of  this is that when you multiply or divide by a negative number, the relationship expressed with the inequality is reversed.
That’s because you’re changing the direction of  the relationship of  the numbers to zero.
If you multiply or divide by a negative number the inequality becomes backwards.
The inequality started with a larger number on the left and ended with a larger number on the right—the opposite relationship.
The solution to how to work with this is easy.
When you multiple or divide by a negative number, flip your inequality sign..
When you’re working with an inequality and negative multiplication or division...
The inequality can contain numbers or unknowns, and it just needs to be true (and if  you can check it with a number line, that’s good too)
If  you need to multiply or divide by a negative number, be sure and do that to both sides of  your equation.
Anytime you multiply or divide by a negative, you’ve got to immediately...
And you have to do this every time you multiply or divide by a negative number.
Negative numbers get LARGER in value as they get CLOSER to zero.
It’s easy to visualize the location of  your numbers on a number line and figure out how the inequality relationship changes.
The inequality sign is just a way to keep track of  the relationship in your equation.
Your job is to work with your equation and the inquality sign in a way that preserves a correct relationship.
So, all you have to do is reverse the inequality when you multiply or divide by negative numbers.
Work with the equality just like an equation, as long as you don’t need to multiply or divide by a NEGATIVE number.
Q: How can we just flip the inequality? Isn’t that changing everything?
A: Actually, flipping the inequality is how you keep things the same.
If you remember the number line,when you multiply or divide by a negative number, you change the relationship between the two sides of the equation.
The inequality symbol is just keeping track of which side is worth more.
A high negative number is worth much less than a low positive number (and visa versa)
So, “less than or equal to” flipped is “greater than or equal to.”
Q: Can you tell me again exactly what a solution set is?
A: The solution set for an inequality contains ALL of the numbers that make your inequality true.
Q: Will I ever have to flip an inequality sign more than once?
If the inequality is written in such a way that you have to multiply or divide both with a negative number more than once, you’ll flip your sign more than once.
Just flip your sign every time you do the negative multiplication or division, and you’ll be okay.
It’s just like when you solve equations; if you apply all the rules correctly, you’ll get the right answer every time.
Q: What if I need to multiply or divide by a fraction, or a decimal.
It doesn’t matter what form the negative number comes in; if it’s negative, you’ll need to flip the inequality sign.
Q: What if I add or subtract a negative number?
If you add a negative number to both sides, both sides of the inequality will be moving to the left on the number line at the same rate.
That means the sides of the equation have the same relationship to each other.
Remember, it’s all about the relative relationship of the sides.
If that doesn’t change, then there’s no reason to change anything.
A:In that case, since you’re not moving a negative number across the inequality, you don’t change the sign.
Now that you can handle negative inequalities, you can solve Kathleen’s penalty points problem correctly.
Here are a few other inequalities to try out, too.
Use the number line at the bottom to check your work.
I’m playing my brother’s team next, so I want a safety net for the upcoming game.
How many games does Kathleen need to win for her Quarterback to get the Heisman?
League rules say if you have more than 10 penalties in the season, your team is disqualified.
Kathleen wants to make sure she spaces penalties out evenly over her 16 games.
What’s the maximum number of penalties she can get per game and not get disqualified?
Now that you can handle negative inequalities, you can solve Kathleen’s penalty points problem correctly.
Here are a few other inequalities to try out, too.
Use the number line at the bottom to check your work.
The mathematical answer is less than or equal to 0.625 penalties per game, but since you can’t get part of a penalty, she can’t space her penalties evenly over all of the game.
She’ll have to decide which games she needs to play dirty in and which ones she’ll need to be on good behavior for.
Don’t forget to flip the sign when you divide by -10
No sign flipping here - you’re dividing by a positive number.
I’m playing my brother’s team next so I want a safety net for the upcoming game.
How many games does Kathleen need to win for her Quarterback to get the Heisman?
League rules say if you have more than 10 penalties in the season, your team is disqualified.
Kathleen wants to make sure she spaces penalties out evenly over her 16 games.
What’s the maximum number of penalties she can get per game and not get disqualified?
Using the magnets below, fill in the blanks to solve the inequalities.
Put your solution back into the original equation to make sure you got things right.
Math Magnets Solution Your job was to fill in the blanks and solve the inequalities.
To combine like terms, you need to put the numbers on one side and the variables on the other.
I thought inequalities had a solution SET as an answer.
How can we check our work with just one value?
Check your work with a value from your solution set....
In fact, let’s take a closer look at solution sets on our number lines...
You can visualize a solution set on a number line The number line is a great way to visualize a solution set.
You’ve been using number lines to show points, but how about a range of  points or an entire solution set? That would help us pick numbers to check our work and also help to understand what numbers will satisfy an inequality.
This is the known boundary point of  your solution set.
Look at the inequality symbol to decide what type of  point to start with.
Draw an arrow along the number line in the direction of  solutions that work.
That’s to the left on your number line for “less than” solutions and to the right on the number line for “greater than” solutions.
We want less than (or equal to), so our line goes to the left.
All the numbers from the circle at 103,000 and below are solutions to the inequality.
Q: Why bother with the number line? A: The number line is useful as a tool to help you understand a solution set.
If you are having trouble visualizing which numbers are included with your solution, try plotting your inequality on a number line.
Here’s another way to think about the number line: a number line is really just a graph with a single axis.
And your line is a plot of all the points that solve your equation on that axis.
Q: Isn’t all of this number line stuff a little juvenile? A: Absolutely not, especially if it helps you get your solutons.
Anything that helps you to understand an inequality, a relationship, or a solution is valuable and should be used.
Just because you learned about a tool when you were younger, doesn’t make that tool less useful now.
Number lines, in particular, are extremely helpful when you’re trying to work with integers and inequalities.
When you go back and forth around zero, it can be easy to lose track of which way you’re going!
Q: What do we do if there’s a big number and I can’t draw a line that goes up that high?
A: You need to be flexible with how big your spacing is on the number line.
When we showed the quarterback’s salary on the previous page, the tick marks were 10,000 each.
You can always draw your solution; you just have to show your number line in the proper scale.
Number lines are a great tool for checking work and visualizing solutions.
You can change the SCALE on your number line without affecting the VALUES on that number line.
Solve the following problems and graph the solution sets on the number lines.
The high school baseball league is trying to determine their MVP, and they’re reviewing the stats for the season.
To win MVP, a player has to have a batting average greater than 0.320
The batting average is the number of hits for the season divided by the number of at bats.
How many hits does a player need to be a contender for the title of MVP?
It’s the last round of darts between Joe and Sam.
Whoever has the high score after Joe’s turn is over wins.
There’s also a rule that if you hit your opponent in the ear with a dart, it’s an automatic deduction of 3 points.
Sam said something about Joe’s Mom, so now Joe wants to know how many times he can hit Sam in the ear and still tie or win the game.
You can’t whack a guy in the ear negative times!
Here, we just wrote out the equation in words to get started.
Joe can whack Sam twice in the ear and still tie!
Solve the following problems and graph the solution sets on the number lines.
The high school baseball league is trying to determine their MVP, and they’re reviewing the stats for the season.
To win MVP, a player has to have a batting average greater than 0.320
The batting average is the number of hits for the season divided by the number of at bats.
How many hits does a player need to be a contender for the title of MVP?
It’s the last round of darts between Joe and Sam.
Whoever has the high score after Joe’s turn is over wins.
There’s also a rule that if you hit your opponent in the ear with a dart, it’s an automatic deduction of 3 points.
Sam said something about Joe’s Mom, so now Joe wants to know how many times he can hit Sam in the ear and still tie or win the game.
Inequalities can have TWO variables Kathleen wants to pick a different defensive team.
That gives her more money to work with for the Quarterback, but now she has two things she doesn’t know...
I need some help $103,000 is not enough for a quarterback...
Use the information above to work out the new inequality for the two missing salaries: Defensive Team and the Quarterback.
Kathleen removed her defensive team pick and freed up some more cash.
For example, suppose you find a quarterback you like who makes $185,000
You can substitute back into the inequality, and then you’ll always get another valid inequality that you can use for the defensive team, d.
Your job was to work out an inequality for the salaries of the Defensive Team and Quarterback.
Now we know how much is left for the defenseive team.
Remember graphing? With equations, a graph gives you an entire line worth of  solutions (if  the equation has two variables)
So graphing is actually a way to see the solutions to an equation.
There are a couple of  things to keep in mind:
Just graph the inequality the way you would any other equation.
Is your answer above or below the line? This is similar to graphing with the number line: think about how your answer relates to your line.
Mark the side of the line your solutions are on.
Use this space for your work, if you need to.
These are just some hints to get you started; we’ll get into details soon!
The line is dashed because it’s “greater than,” so it’s over, but not including the line.
Your job was to try and graph the inquality below.
Use a graph to visualize the solutions to an inequality Graphing inequalities in two variables is like graphing equations, with some extra shading.
If  you have an inequality, to graph the whole solution, you need to do the following:
The variable on the vertical axis (usually y) needs to be isolated.
Just make sure that it’s dashed or solid, depending upon your inequality.
Figure out if  the shading should be above the line or below the line.4
Answers made in the shade Look at our example from earlier, and plot one of  the solutions.
Does that tell you anything about what the shaded area represents?
Shading shows potential answers The ordered pairs in the shaded region satisfy the inequality.
Every pair is a solution! The great thing about this is that it makes trial and error a thing of  the past.
If  you decide you want x to be -1.5, you can use all the y values that are greater than the line and still satisfy the inequality.
Give it a try! If  you substitute in both numbers, you should always get a valid inequality:
All of the ordered pairs in the shaded region satisfy the inequality.
This is similar to the second graph, but it would have to be a solid line.
The inequality is similar to the first graph, but the inequality is the wrong way.
You’ll have to get d in terms of q first.
We’ve setup the grid so it will work for the problem, so be sure to pay attention to the tick marks!
So I can graph the players I have left, then all I have to do is look at the rosters and the graph to figure out the options I’ve got.
For the problem, the solutions can only be positive (you’re not going to get a quarterback to pay you, after all)
You’ll have to get d in terms of q first.
Any point you plot on the graph in the shaded region will work.
Are you ready for some football? Now, using your graph, help Kathleen make some picks.
You need to pick a defensive team, and then see what quarterback you can afford.
To use the graph, pick a defensive team, and find it on the d axis.
Try and get as close to using all Kathleen’s available money as possible.
Ok - so who is it?? I need a defensive team and a quarterback!
Excellent! The Eagles are in for my defensive team, and Dan Dreter is taking the Heisman this year!
Inequalitycross All things (not) being equal, while you’re waiting for the season to play out, pass the time with a crossword.
When you graph an inequality the answers are the ________ area [SHADED]
The uppermost or lower most value that solves the inequality is called a [BOUNDARY]
Negative numbers get _____________ as they get closer to zero.
If the boundary is included in the solution (equal-to) you use a ________ circle.
If the inequality is greater than or greater than or equal to then you shade the ________ part of the graph.
Number lines work for visualizing solutions for one variable inequalities.
Tools for your Algebra Toolbox This chapter was about algebraic inequalities.
I need to know what you know about what you.
In fact, you need an equation for every unknown you’ve got.
It’s New Year’s Eve, and Zach has a bunch of people coming in just an hour.
My girlfriend was supposed to do this, but she’s still getting ready.
She said the punch has to be 52% sparkling, but that’s all I know.
What the heck am I supposed to do with these percentages?
He needs an equation to figure out how much cider and how much pineapple juice to use to get a 52% sparking punch.
Write the equation for the amount of punch to use:
What form of linear equation are you using? (circle one):
This is just the amount, in gallons, of each type of juice to use.
He needs an equation to figure out how much cider and how much pineapple juice to use.
To graph this, you could solve for the intercepts or manipulate the equation to get it into slope-intercept.
Write the equation for the amount of punch to use:
What form of linear equation are you using? (circle one):
The volume of the punch bowl is 5 gallons, so that’s the total.
What does the graph show? What happens as c gets bigger? What about as p gets bigger?
This graph shows that as c goes up, p goes down.
So that means that the more cider that goes in, the less pineapple juice goes in.
Not only that, but since the slope is -1, c and p go up or down at the same rate..
A line means infinite solutions Since we have a line that shows the entire relationship between p and c, we know that this equation has an infinite number of solutions for the problem.
That means that there are an infinite number of  ways to mix up cider and pineapple juice to make 5 gallons...
Do all of the solutions represented by the line make sense for THIS problem?
What does the graph show? What happens as c gets bigger? As p gets bigger?
Zach is worried about how sparkling the punch is, not just what will fit in his bowl.
This one has to be about how sparkling the punch is, not the overall amount.
You can’t have -1 gallons of liquid! If  you’re working with a real-world problem, you have to keep in mind your problem’s context.
The values for c and p can’t be less than zero because you can’t have less than zero gallons of  punch.
So we know that some of  the answers on our graph don’t work, but we still don’t know what mixture Zach should use.
All Zach has is a bunch of ways to mix up cider and pineapple juice to get 5 gallons.
But Zach needs more than just 5 gallons of  mix.
Your job was to come up with another equation, related to how sparkling Zach’s punch is.
Q: Where did those numbers before c and p come from?
A: We applied the same logic to c and p that we did for the total volume of punch.
If you can multiply the total volume of punch by the percentage of sparkling (converted to a decimal), you can do the same thing for the other two liquids.
Q: How can you just “figure out” the amount of sparkling punch?
A: This problem of Zach’s is actually a classic mixture problem.
Mixture problems like this are usually based on a proportion, in our case, how sparkling the punch will be.
Q: Can I rewrite the equation in terms of x and y to make it easier?
Either you can have the equation and the graph in terms of x and y or in terms of c and p.
Q: How much do we need to worry about negative solutions?
A: For this problem, you don’t need to worry about negative solutions since you can’t have negative punch.
We’ll look at how to express those types of limitations as part of an equation when we learn about functions in a few chapters.
Q: How can we work with these two equations together?
But the volume equation has an infinite number of solutions, and the sparkling equation has an infinite number of solutions.
If  you apply the same idea to the c and p variables, we’ve got a new equation.
How does the sparkling equation work? The problem Zach has with just the first equation is that there are an infinite number of ways to mix the ingredients together and get 5 gallons of  punch.
But none of  those solutions specifically deal with his girlfriend’s request that the punch is 52% sparkling.
By coming up with another equation that deals with the mixing, we can figure out which solutions create the right mix.
This second equation will help because we’re using the same variables representing the same thing.
To develop the second equation, we took the second piece of  information that we had about each variable—how sparkling each liquid is—and applied it to the variables to come up with a new problem:
We’ve got another linear equation This is another linear equation in terms of  the same variables that we used in the first equation, c and p.
This equation is in standard form, and you can work with it in exactly the same way.
What can we do with the second equation to help find a solution to the punch problem?
Now we have TWO linear equations So now we’ve got two equations with the same two variables.
Since both equations talk about the same thing, with the same variables, they can be looked at together:
We know that this is a linear equation which means that all the points on the solution line solve this equation.
All the points on this equation’s line solve this problem.
One equation is in terms of  total volume of  punch, and the other is in terms of  the sparkling volume of  punch, but both equations are about volume.
Each equation comes with an infinite number of  ordered pairs that will solve the equation.
Remember, solving an equation means coming up with values for the unknowns that will make that particular equation true.
What we need, though, is a set of  numbers that will solve both equations.
So how can we find a solution that works for both equations?
The graph of a linear equation is the infinite number of solutions that solve the equation.
Every point on that line is a solution for THAT PARTICULAR linear equation.
Use this space for any work you need to do to graph the equations.
We already did c + p = 5, so this is the same line from earlier.
Just convert that slope to a fraction and it’s much easier to work with.
The INTERSECTION of the lines solves BOTH linear equations The point where the lines meet is the point where both equations have a solution.
So for Zach’s punch problem, we need to find where the two lines meet.
That’s the amount of  liquid we want to make the perfect party punch.
Each line is an infinite set of  ordered pairs that satisfy that particular equation and make the equation true.
The intersection is the solution because it solves both equations at the same time.
Solve multiple unknowns with a SYSTEM of EQUATIONS You’ve just solved a system of  equations! A system of  equations is a group of  equations that can be treated as one problem.
The solution is the point that satisfies all of  the equations at the same time.
When it comes to a system of  equations, though, you have to have two equations to find two unknowns.
Why? Because if you only have one equation with two unknowns, you have a line that goes on forever.
To know which point on the line to pick, you need more information.
A second equation gives you a second line, and then you can find the intersection of  the two lines to solve your system.
If you have two unknowns you need two independent relationships to find the values of the unknowns.
Both points work out - which proves that the intersection solves them both and solves the problem!
Q: Do we have to check our work? A: Yes! Really, we’re going through this again? It takes like two seconds and then you know you got the right answer.
Imagine, walking away from a problem knowing it’s completely right.
It’s also good practice for manipulating the equation and substitution.
Q: Is graphing the only way to figure the answer out?
A: Stay tuned, there are more options coming up! The big advantage of graphing, though, is that it helps you see what could happen if something changed in your system.
Q: How did you know you can work with both equations together?
A: Well, it goes back to understanding the situation, not just manipulating equations.
Algebra is a tool to solve a problem you’re dealing with, not the other way around.
So when you’re working with equations, you need to always keep the context of your problem in mind.
Zach was interested in a punch that was not only 5 gallons, but also had the perfect amount of sparkle.
Q: What if I only have one equation and two variables, can I get an answer?
Q: What is a system of equations good for in real life?
Mixture problems (like we used here), supply and demand situations, area and perimeter, distance vs.
Q: If I have two equations with the same two variables, is there always a solution that solves both equations?
Sometimes there isn’t an answer to the two specific equations.
Zach dropped some glasses When Zach and his girlfriend were setting up for the party, Zach broke a few glasses.
The glasses were rented, so Zach’s got to pay to replace them.
Now Zach’s trying to figure out how many more glasses he needs, and he can’t remember how many of  each type he dropped.
Write the two equations that Zach can use to figure out what glasses he needs.
Solve your system of equations using a graph Graphing both equations is a way to find the values that satisfy both equations.
We can graph the line that solves each equation, and then find the intersection point.
Then we check our work in both equations, and Zach’s in and out of  the glasses store in time to party.
Use whatever method you want to put both solution lines on the same graph.
Using the gridlines on the graph, find the point where the two lines meet.
Go back to both equations and substitute in your solution point.
How many of these, x? How many of these, y?
A number of glasses equation: Zach broke a total of  7 glasses.
These are both in standard form, so we’ll manipulate them to y = mx + b for easy graphing.
You can substitute substitution for graphing Sometimes graphing a system of  equations just isn’t useful.
The points of  intersection aren’t falling along gridlines, for example.
In those cases, you can use substitution to solve your system of  equations instead.
To make substitution work, start with solving one equation for one variable.
Now you’ve got a way to represent x in terms of  y.
So now, put that value for x into the other equation.
Once you have y, just put that value back into your first equation and solve for x.
Now we’ve got all y, and can solve this equation.
The substitution method works because a system of  equations is a set of  equations with the same variables.
If  you can solve for one variable in terms of  another variable, you can get a valid equation in terms of  one variable.
The substitution method works because a system of equations is a set of equations with the same unknowns.
We use this value for x, in the SECOND equation.
To solve a system of equations with graphing, the intersection of the lines is the solution.
Using substitution, figure out how many of each type of glass Zach needs to replace.
Using substitution, figure out how many of each type of glass Zach needs to replace.
Substitution has some advantages: you get an exact answer, and since you’re not estimating on a graph, it may be more exact.
There’s a lot of equation manipulation to be done, and that can take a while.
Substitution also doesn’t allow you to see any of what’s going on.
If you are trying to figure out what happens anywhere else in your system of equations, substitution doesn’t help much.
Q: Why is it ok to treat both equations as part of the same problem? Can you really exchange two variables in two different equations?
A: If the problem statement says that they are the same two variables, then they are! It can either be the problem situation (like Zach’s punch) or two specific equations that are given together.
The reason you have two equations and two unknowns is that you know two different things about how these things are related.
Q: How do I decide which equation to use first? How about which variable to solve for first?
The best bet is to look at both equations and figure out which one is the easiest to work with.
The important thing to remember is that you will always get to the right answer eventually, as long as you keep your algebraic manipulation within the rules.
Oh, sorry - I just checked again; it was $30
Using Kathleen’s new cost, figure out how many of each glass Zach needs to get.
Graph the problem and then use substitution to check your answer.
Your job was to (re-)figure out how many of each glass Zach needs to get.
Graph the problem and then use substitution to check your answer.
Zach and Kathleen have enough glasses and the perfect punch mix.
The girls are going to leave if I don’t get the music right.
Come up with two equations in standard form with two unknowns to figure out how many fast songs and how many slow songs Zach will need.
Each song is about four minutes long, and the party’s four hours long.
Zach’s figured out that if  he increases the number of  slow songs, then more girls will stay.
He wants to play a slow song for every two fast songs.
But Zach’s got to put a playlist together for the rest of  the party, and he needs your help.
Q: Does it matter which equation comes first? A: When you’re working with a system of equations, it doesn’t matter what order you work with them.
As long as you consistently follow the rules of manipulating an equation consistently, you’ll be fine.
Q: Can I use any variables that I want? A: Yes! We picked s and f to stand for slow and fast, but you can always stick with the basic x and y.
If you use something besides x and y when you’re graphing, make sure to label your graph axes correctly.
Come up with two equations in standard form with two unknowns to figure out how many fast songs and how many slow songs Zach will need.
We found out that there should be one slow song to 2 fast songs.
Another way to think of this is to say that there are half as many slow songs as fast songs.
That’s true, since the variables are the same in both.
Well, what if you can cancel things out? Like won’t the positive f and negative f cancel? Then you’d just have s to solve for.
Well, we can add the first equation to the second equation.
Oh, I see, now we can just solve for s!Kristina.
These equations can be added together, just like you add numbers together.
The elimination method is the process of  adding up both of  the equations and then working with the resulting equation.
This is a valid way of  working with equations because both equations have the same unknowns, just with different relationships.
Specifically, since you’re dealing with an equation where the left side, s+f, equals the right side, 60, you’re doing the same thing to both sides of  the other equation.
This method is really useful because it can cut out a whole bunch of  steps in your solution.
The elimination method - a method of solving a system of equations through adding the two equations together and working with the resulting equation.
Because these two equations are a system of  equations, and they have the same unknowns, you can skip some steps by just adding up all of  the terms of  both equations.
If  the equations are set up right, you’ll lose one of  the variables and make life much easier, without graphing or substitution.
Now you can solve for s, and then substitute it back into either one of  the original equations and solve for f:
A: Yes, if your equations are set up the right way first.
We’ll talk more about how you can set that up in a moment.
Q: Does it matter which equation we put the first solution into?
Once you solve for one of the unknowns, you can substitute your value into either equation to solve for the remaining unknown.
That makes sense, right? The solution for a system of equations is still the ONE point that will solve both equations.
That means for that one point, x and y (or s or f) are the same for both equations.
Q:Why is it ok to just add up two equations like this?
The variables are the same thing at the solution point.
So you can work with both equations because they are both describing the same variables.
Each equation is just written a different way, so combining them gets you a single solution.
Adding the equations together is just another way of working with all of the variables.
Q: Which method should I use: graphing, substitution, or elimination?
A: The good news is that any of them will work for any problem.
As you saw, the limits on the graphing method is you have to be able to read the graph, so it’s tough with decimal or fractional answers.
Substitution is the most straightforward, but it’s a lot of back and forth.
That can take a lot of time, and there’s a greater chance for mistakes.
Elimination is great if your equations are setup right, and they’re usually pretty fast, too.
Q: What if the equations aren’t set up to cancel each other out?
A: Then you’ll need to manipulate one (or both) of the equations so you end up with variables that will cancel each other out.
Suppose you have two equations, one with a -4f, and one with a +f.
That will give you a situation where the variables will cancel out.
The elimination method requires PLANNING For elimination to work properly, you must have two variables cancel each other out.
Your job was to solve the punch problem from earlier using the elimination method.
Manipulate your equations for elimination Add the two punch equations together and, you’ll get an equation in two variables that you still can’t solve.
To eliminate a variable, you need to have the coefficient in front of  one of  your variables be the opposite of  the coefficient in front of  the same variable in your second equation.
After figuring out your system of  equations, you need to look at the system and figure out a couple of  things:
Which variable are you going to try and get to be the opposite coefficient of  the same variable in your other equation? Here’s where some strategy comes in.
Let’s try and work with c since there aren’t any decimals.
Then we can add the two equations and use elimination.
Determining the variable to cancel out, and manipulating the equation to get there, is the tricky part of  the elimination method.
Here are a few things you can look out for:
To make the variable constants cancel each other out and keep your equation balanced, you need to multiply the entire equation by the right constant.
Q: What if I pick the wrong variable to eliminate? A: There’s really no “wrong variable.” As long as you properly apply the rules of manipulating an equation, you won’t get the wrong answer.
You’ll get a better idea of which variables to choose as you have more experience solving equations, but if there’s one that has a coefficient of 1, it’s usually easiest to go for that variable.
Then, it’s easy to figure out what has to be done to the entire equation to make it work and eliminate the variable.
Q: Why is it ok to add up the two equations? A: Because both equations are using the same variables, representing the same things.
But you can’t swap around sides or otherwise change the equations.
Just add the two equations together to eliminate one variable, and solve.
Q: Does it matter which equation I put my solution value back into?
But just like choosing which variable to eliminate, there’s usually an easier equation to use.
If one equation uses whole numbers, and the other uses fractions or decimals, it’s probably easier to use the equation with whole numbers to get a quicker solution.
Q: So I should use substitution for solving all my systems of equations?
You can use graphing, substitution, or elimination, and all will work.
It’s really just a matter of figuring out what works best for you in a certain situation, and going with that.
Remember: as long as you follow the rules, you’ll get the same answer no matter which method you use.
Look at the following situations, write the system of equations, and then solve them using either the elimination method or the substitution method.
Zach has been working on figuring out his income from the party.
How many tickets were advance sales, and how many were purchased at the door?
Zach ordered 11 cakes for the party and paid for them, but the bakery called him up and said they couldn’t find his order.
How many of each kind of cake did he order to feed everyone?
Look at the following situations, write the system of equations, and then solve them using either the elimination method or the substitution method.
Zach has been working on figuring out his income from the party.
How many tickets were advance sales, and how many were bought at the door?
Zach ordered 11 cakes for the party and paid for them, but the bakery called him up and said they couldn’t find his order.
How many of each kind of cake did he order to feed everyone?
To have the as cancel out, the first equation needs to be multiplied by -18
Head First: What’s it like being a system of equations? Do you find you have identity problems?
System: Not at all—just because I have multiple equations, doesn’t mean I have multiple personalities! All of  my equations work for the same problem.
I just meant that being made up of  two completely different equations must be tricky.
Really, I just think it’s easier to have a couple of  equations that describe me.
The equations working together is what really makes me tick.
Since I usually have two unknowns, I couldn’t be solved uniquely without both of  them.
Head First: There are a number of  ways to solve you—let’s talk about substitution, okay?
The substitution method is one of  my favorites because it gives you an exact answer, but there’s really not much planning involved.
You just go ahead and get one variable in terms of  the other, and then switch equations and substitute.
You get one variable, let’s say x, in terms of  the other, which is probably y with some constants.
As you start performing the substitution, there can be a lot of  manipulating to work out a solution.
Head First: There’s another option for finding an exact solution, right?
With elimination, you have to figure out in advance what variable you need to cancel out.
Once you do that, all of  the manipulation is done in advance.
System: Well, with the elimination method, you add up the two equations, all the terms on the left of both equals signs, and all of  the terms on the right of both equals signs together.
As long as one variable is eliminated, you will end up with one equation in one variable.
But speaking of  seeing—what about those of  us who like to see what’s going on?
To solve me that way, you just graph both equations and look for an intersection.
Graphing is great for getting a sense of  the trends of  both lines and a good starting point for guessing what may be coming next, say if  you add more cider.
You’re complicated, but nobody can say there aren’t plenty of  ways to work with you!
You’ve done a lot of work, so I want you to come out to the best New Year’s party ever!
Using the graphing method and elimination, you figured out the perfect punch.
Using the elimination method, you figured out how many slow songs and how many fast songs Zach needs to pick to keep the girls happy.
When shopping leads to relationship ruin! While Zach has been busy planning his party, his girlfriend, Kathleen, has been getting ready too.
In addition to being a fantasy-football mogul, Kathleen loves to shop.
She’s been hitting the mall pretty hard lately, looking for something to wear to the party.
Kathleen’s shopping is not something that Zach is a big fan of, so when she gets a good deal, Kathleen makes sure Zach knows about it.
While showing off  her purchases, Kathleen said that she bought twice as many dresses as shoes and got 6 things all together.
Using his mad Algebra skills, Zach did some quick math and then got pretty upset.
To figure out that Kathleen was lying, Zach needed to to figure out how many pairs of  shoes and how many dresses she actually bought.
Shoes:     We’ll call them s, and they’re $8 a pair.
This doesn’t make a lot of  sense, and it doesn’t explain why Zach is mad at Kathleen.
Let’s try graphing the lines and see what’s going on.
Rewrite the equations into a form that you can graph.
Remember, d is the y so if we want to g et it.
You could have worked with these equations any way you wanted to graph them, but the graph should look the same.
Rewrite the equations into a form that you can graph.
Zach knew from his quick math that there is no solution to Kathleen’s equations, so she must be lying about something.
The lines are parallel! That means that there isn’t any one point that will satisfy both equations.
Parallel lines go on forever without crossing, so there’s no intersection.
That means that what Kathleen said can’t be true because there’s no combination of  shoes and dresses that will satisfy both equations.
Hmm - I noticed that those lines have the same slope but different intercepts...
That’s actually the key indicator that two lines are parallel.
If  you have two equations with the same slope, you don’t need to graph it.
Sometimes two equations aren’t two lines You know a lot about equations at this point: you can graph them a bunch of  different ways, and if  you have a system of  equations, you can solve them three different ways.
Not only that, but if you have two equations with the same slope, there’s no answer, right?
You can have two equations that have the same slope, but they may look a little different.
However, when you plot them, the lines look exactly the same:
Those two don’t look the same, until you reduce them...
Since both equations are the same line, that means that every point on the line satisfies both equations—there are an infinite number of  solutions.
So, if  you come across two lines with the same slope, just check and see if  the intercepts are the same, too.
If  they are, it’s the same line, and if  not, they’re parallel.
Look at the following systems of equations and answer the questions about them.
Solve the following systems of equations using the method shown.
The best way to handle this is to actually multiply both equations.
You can do this problem with substitution or graphing, too.
Setting the system of equations up and adding them together is called the  __________ method.
The solution to a system of equations is the ____________
For the elimination method to work, you have to _____
Setting the system of equations up and adding them together is called the  __________ method.
The solution to a system of equations is the ____________
For the elimination method to work, you have to _____
Setting the system of equations up and adding them together is called the  __________ method.
The solution to a system of equations is the ____________
For the elimination method to work, you have to _____
Tools for your Algebra Toolbox This chapter was about solving systems of equations with three.
So far, we’ve dealt with variables like x and y.
Math or No Math semi-regional masters final Our champion, Kate, is back to defend her title against a new challenger, James.
Kate did her work by multiplying the whole first expression by the second.
James did his work by splitting up the first binomial.
This is distributing 2x-1 to both parts of the first binomial.
How do we figure out who’s right? Well, if  you know a solution, substitution will work.
So you can try plugging the right x value into each of  their equations and see if  the math works out.
If  the values don’t come out right, then one of  the simplifications that Kate and James ended up with isn’t correct.
The producers told you the correct value for x- is 3 and the equation is equal to zero.
Substitute -3 in the different equations for x, and see who’s right.
Show your work, and don’t forget to circle the correct expression, too.
Okay, but how did James actually come up with his answer? I mean, that’s great that the...
To understand what James did, you need to know how to handle exponents in equations.
Substitute -3 in the different equations for x, and see who’s right.
Show your work, and don’t forget to circle the correct expression, too.
That works! The equation was supposed to equal zero, so this one is correct.
Binomial - is a special case of a polynomial that is a.
Binomials are groups of two algebraic terms Kate and James are working with binomials on this round of  Math or No Math.
A binomial is an expression that contains two algebraic terms.
Poly just means many, so a polynomial is any expression with multiple terms.
So anytime you see an expression with more than one term, think polynomial.
The distributive property, revisited Look back at the problem Kate and James were given in the contest.
So how about just doing the multiplication? Since the expression can’t be simplified, we’re going to have to do multiplication with multiple terms—we’re going to have to distribute.
Both terms in the first binomial need to be distributed over both terms of  the second binomial.
That’s great if  you only have one number multiplied over a binomial.
But we’re dealing with is a binomial multiplied over a binomial.
So we’ve first got to distribute both terms of  the first binomial over the entire second binomial.
Multiplying two binomials means you have to distribute both terms from the first binomial over both terms of the second binomial.
Simplify binomials with the distributive property So now we just need to actually distribute our entire binomial.
Before digging into Kate and James’ problem, let’s take a look at how we’d do this distribution in general:
Since a and b are constants, bx and ax are actually like terms.
Use the distributive property and simplify the Math or No Math challenge.
Use the distributive property and simplify the Math or No Math challenge.
Q: The distributive property says we have to spread out both terms?
The distributive property says that you have to distribute the first binomial over the entire second binomial.
That means both terms of the first binomial need to be multiplied by both terms of the second.
A: There are some tools you can use, but you’ve still got to know that multipying binomials is really about distribution.
It’s not that bad as long as you take the first terms and multiply them over the second binomial.
Q: So this works the same for numbers and variables? A: It sure does.
Of course, in cases where you’ve got all numbers, you can just work inside the parentheses first and avoid all this distribution.
But you’ve noticed something important: any rule that applies to variables also applies to numbers.
Q: How often do you really have to multiply binomials? A: Actually, you’re most likely to use this the other way around.
We’ll talk about it in the next section, but when you have certain types of equations, you’ll have to go from that equation to a couple of binomials.
Sound confusing? Don’t worry, we’re going to spend a lot more time on that next.
Kate’s up to her old tricks, cranking through the speed round.
Kate cheated, didn’t she? She didn’t even show her work!
The SQUARE pattern If  you have two binomials that only differ in the sign of  the second term, you’re dealing with a square pattern.
Kate looked for patterns instead of working the problem out.
Have you ever noticed little patterns in a friend’s phone number or how a football team runs their offense? A pattern lets you figure out what’s going on based on some key things you recognize...
There are patterns that let you avoid lots of  extra work.
What you’ve got here is the difference of  two squares.
You square the first term and subtract from it the square of  the second term.
So anytime you see two binomials that are exactly the same, except for the sign before one of  the constants, then the solution is the difference of the squares of  the two terms.
You can just skip the middle steps and jump right to the answer!
We can work this out the normal way to see what the answer is.
This is what Kate saw when she solved the last problem.
What about when the signs are the SAME? But what about when you’ve got two terms that are the same in both binomials, and the signs before the constants are the same? Let’s work one out:
Another way to think about this is the square of  a binomial.
So this is really just a binomial multiplied by itself.
The signs are the same, but the sign is negative this time.
Will they always work? A: As long as the binomials match one of the patterns, then you bet! Just make sure you watch your signs and coefficients.
Q: What if the binomials are close but don’t exactly match one of those square patterns?
A: Then you’re going to have to use distribution to figure out what the simplified equation really is.
Multiply the terms through, collect your like terms, and then you have the answer.
But these patterns only work if there’s an exact match.
Your job was to solve the binomial multiplications below, without working through each problem step-by-step.
Square the first term, square the last term, and add 2 times the first times the last term in the middle.
You multiply 2 by x by the second term, w hich is.
Suppose you’re on a fast-paced, high-dollar game show, forced to simplify binomials at a moment’s notice.
When the square patterns aren’t working, you’ve got to have another way to simplify binomials.
Thankfully, there’s another sort of  pattern you can follow, called FOIL.
Then just add it all up: x bx ax ab2 ++ +
Let’s suppose that a and b aren’t the same, so our square patterns won’t work.
Dan says:  Brett had a comment to turn this into an exercise, but given the number of exercises I added earlier plus the fact that the next page is one I didn’t convert this page.
I think the scenario is carried through a lot better now and the FOIL stuff is linked in through the previous NDQ.
You don’t have to think about distribution as much, and you’re usually left with an easy combining of  like terms at the end.
And, best of  all, FOIL always works, even if  there’s not a pattern to use!
See how you would have stacked up by filling in the missing pieces.
See how you would have stacked up by filling in the missing pieces.
We’re more than halfway through the Math or No Math competition, and here’s where the contestants stand:
Still, he got the right answer and took the points in round 1:
Although he got the right answer, James got crushed in the speed round.
Kate needed some help keeping her terms straight in round 1:
But Kate totally nailed the next round by using the squares pattern.
James got the right answer, but was too slow in the speed round.
Kate recognized identical terms and used the difference of two sqares.
Kate uses a common denominator to combine like terms in this step.
Kate multiplied everything by 12 to get rid of fractions.
Un-distribution is called FACTORING So far, we’ve talked a lot about distribution.
That’s when you take a number or term and multiply it over a group of  terms.
So here’s how the same expression looks, with that 11 shown explicitly:
When you’ve got a number or term that everything else is multiplied by, that number or term is called a factor.
So 11—and x, for that matteris a factor of  the top part of  this equation:
These two are the same quantity, so they cancel out.
A factor is a term that’s multiplied over an ENTIRE expression.
Factoring is un-mulitplying Pulling out common factors from a term or group is called factoring.
And when you’re working with a group of  terms, factoring is the opposite of  distributing.
Remember, the distributive property is all about multiplying groups together:
Factoring is pulling numbers and terms apart by finding terms that multiply together to make another term or expression.
So the opposite of  this is to take the solution, and pull out the common factor:
By taking advantage of  the distributive property in reverse, you can pull out common terms.
By manipulating the terms this way, you can set up an equation that is usually easier to work with.
Sometimes you can cancel out a common factor, or even an entire group.
The distributive property means that you need to evenly distribute a factor over all the terms of a group.
Factor by looking for common terms Factoring isn’t a nice process like FOIL...
But these aren’t patterns that are as easy as the square patterns.
Instead, you’ve got to try and “see” common factors in an expression.
Sound tricky? It is a bit, but you’ll get better with practice.
Here are some ways to get started when you’re solving an equation and you think factoring might help:
If  there are quite a few terms, look for numbers that repeat, or multiples of  numbers that keep showing up.
Next, figure out the greatest common factor (GCF) of  the terms you’re interested in.
This is probably one of  the numbers that kept showing up in the first step.
Pull out the GCF and write it down, and then write in a set of parentheses.
Inside the parentheses, write the new terms that are left after the GCF is pulled out.
These are your original terms, each divided by the GCF you just pulled out.
If you’re rusty on the GCF, jump to the appendix and brush up.
The common factor for all of those terms is 11x, so pull that out.
What’s left inside is the original terms divided by the GCF.
This is the part to f actor find the GCF of 11x, x.
Factoring: Thanks! I’m really looking forward to explaining more about who I really am.
Factoring: Any time a term, set of  terms, or equation has a factor removed from it, I’m the one doing with work.
Head First: That seems pretty general; can you be more specific?
Head First: Well then, what would you say your strengths are? How can you help?
Factoring: Well, when you use me to get your variable away from all of  its coefficients, equations seem to get a lot easier to solve.
Factoring: Exactly! One easy step and you’ve got your variable alone.
Factoring: Well, yeah! I don’t like to flex my muscles too much, but I do have some mad skills.
Factoring: I’m the way you can undo a distribution or multiplication, since I identify factors and remove them from a group you’re working with.
Factoring: And, although I don’t work directly with them, the associative and commutative properties need to be involved most of  the time, too.
Factoring: Don’t forget implied numbers! If  a variable is written alone, there’s a one if  you factor away the variable.
I feel so separated from the group most of  the time.
Use factoring to solve these Math or No Math bonus problems.
Your job was to factor and then solve all of the equations.
Here we only factored a half, but you could’ve factored out 1/2x if you wanted.
James split up the equation and set both expressions equal to zero.
Why did James get two answers? Which of his answers is correct? Is either answer correct?
The final round: Kate can pull even and force a tie, or James can ride off with the grand prize.
Zero times anything is 0 Kate was working her problem out the normal way, but James noticed something...
Suppose the first grouping is a, and the second grouping is b:
Both a and b can be quantities, numbers, variables, whatever.
If  either of  those groupings is zero, then it will cause the entire equation to go to zero.
That’s called the Zero Product Rule: any number or term multipled by zero is always zero.
We need either a or b to be zero to make this work out.
If  either a or b is zero, then the entire equation goes to zero.
James was right; there are actually two right answers for this problem.
Q: Does a common factor have to appear in all the terms in an equation?
A: You can factor any or all terms of the equation.
But when you pull out the factor, it’s only multiplied by the terms you pulled that factor out of.
In Algebra, all of the terms on one side of the equals sign are typically factored at once.
But in more complicated math, you may have several factors in a single equation.
Q: What if I choose a right factor, but it doesn’t help me solve my problem?
A: As long as you  follow the rules and factor correctly, you can always go back to your original equation.
Just like inverse operations and distributing, all of these tools can be tried out and undone if they don’t help.
Q:How come James got to work on only part of his equation at a time?
Since only one part of the equation has to be zero, both of those pieces can be set equal to zero and then solved independently.
By applying the ZPR, you can work with two equations separately, and both solutions will work.
Q: How can we have two solutions for a single equation?
A: Good question, and we’ll talk about that a lot more in the next chapter.
For now, you just need to know that if you substitute each value you found for x back into the equation, and you get the right solution, you’re good to go.
Usually you can get at the solution for a problem several different ways, factoring being just one of them.
If you try factoring something and it doesn’t get you anywhere, don’t worry; just try something else!
Q: What about equations in terms of multiple variables? What if we have x, y, z, and w?
If the GCF has multiple variables, you can factor them all out.
Another strategy with an equation of multiple variables is to factor out just one of the variables, if you can.
And, of course, the Zero Product Rule is always a great option.
James and Kate expanded binomials James was careful with distribution, but Kate wasn’t, so she got her first problem wrong.
James’ factoring frenzy blew Kate away James knew that factoring to make a manipulation easier worked great...
James finished up with applying the ZPR to solve a tough equation.
Since Kate didn’t know about the ZPR, she was out of  luck.
Kate’s squared pattern skills rocked Kate knew the difference of  two squares right off  the top of  her head and didn’t need to do any work.
Pool Puzzle Your job is to take terms from the pool.
You may not use the same term more than once, and you won’t need to use all the terms.
Your goal is to complete the solutions for each problem.
Note: each term from the pool can only be used once!
Pool Puzzle Solution Your job is to take terms from the pool.
You may not use the same term more than once, and you won’t need to use all the terms.
Your goal is to complete the solutions for each problem.
Square the first term, twice the second, square the second [BINOMIALSQUARED]
To help simplify solving quadratics, manipulate them to be equal to ______
Factoring to get an equation in the form of two terms multiplied together to equal zero means that you can use the ZPR to solve.
Tools for your Algebra Toolbox This chapter was about expanding binomials and basic factoring.
Last: Multiply together the last two terms of both binomials.
I’m just supposed to wait in this line all day? Look, it even curves.
But just because an equation doesn’t graph as a straight line, doesn’t mean it’s unimportant.
Sometimes you’ve got to deal with terms that have exponents.
In fact, some equations with squared terms graph as curves!
How’s that work? Well, there’s only one way to find out...
The pledges have to nail the opposing fraternity’s president with water balloons.
Jon’s a pledge and has to hit the president at least three times during pledge week, or he’s got no hope of  getting into Theta Theta Pi.
Traditionally, the water balloons have been launched by hand, or maybe with a slingshot.
Jon is out to make Theta Theta Pi history, though...
With a catapult, he can be more accurate and hit Pi Gamma Delta’s president even harder, and that means he’ll get into the frat for sure!
The catapult comes with a range equation in terms of  height and distance.
If  you know how high you want a balloon to go, you can figure out where to place the catapult so it plummets right down on the Pi Gamma Delta president’s head.
The site lists the range of each catapult in terms of an equation.
Figure out x so Jon can place the catapult in the right spot.
Now, what’s x? Substitute in a couple of values, and see what you come up with.
A quadratic equation is any polynomial equation that has a degree of two; that just means that the largest exponent for any variable is two.
The degree of  the equation also dictates how many solutions there can be, and since a quadratic equation has a degree of  two, these equations can have up to two solutions.
So Jon’s equation needs to be manipulated to solve for x twice.
If  we can manipulate the quadratic equation so it’s a product of  two quantities equal to zero, these equations will be a lot easier to solve.
Expanding two binomials made a quadratic equation, so maybe factoring the quadratic back to two binomials is the way to go.
Figure out x so they can place the catapult in the right spot.
To make this easier to work with, multiply both sides by -1
Now, what’s x? Try a couple of values out with substitution and see what you come up with.
That’s ok, but it’s pretty obvious that trial and error isn’t the way to go.
There must be a way to solve these things algebraically.
Factoring Magnets Use the magnets at the bottom of the page to fill in the blanks, and see if you can solve this problem on your own.
Two of these values will be x, and two will be numbers.
Use this space to check your work by expanding back out the binomials:
Factoring Magnets Solution Your job was to use the magnets to solve the quadratic and help Jon hit the opposing frat’s president.
Use this space to check your work by expanding back out the binomials:
This is where we apply FOIL to make sure the factoring was right.
But what does that actually mean? How can a catapult fire a balloon a distance of  -5? Keep in mind the context of  this problem.
A negative distance means that the balloon goes behind the front of  the catapult.
That doesn’t make sense in this context, so we can ignore that answer.
So let’s shoot the catapult from 15 feet away from the president...
Write the new equation that you need to solve for Jon.
Write the new equation that you need to solve for Jon.
You should always factor with a PLAN If  we’re going to get the balloon to hit the president, we’ve got to solve our quadratics faster this time.
What we did with the first equation wasn’t very organized, or consistent.
We tried a bunch of  factors, and then had to do FOIL in reverse.
The equation needes to be in the standard form of  a quadratic, set to zero.
You have to have the zero, or you can’t use the zero product rule and split up the possible solutions.
Once the equation is in the proper form, you know you’re going to need two binomials that start with x.
Fill those in and you’ve already got half  of  the terms ready.
First, they have to be multiplied together to get the constant in the quadratic equation.
Second, they need to add together to get the middle x term.
The standard form of a quadratic equation is three terms:
These need to be added (or subtracted) to get the x term the -10x.
Then, expand the binomials you came up with, using FOIL, and make sure that it matches what you started with.
Factoring Up Close Picking the last two terms to fill in for the binomials is the trickiest part of factoring.
Sometimes it helps to get even further into the details.
The easiest way to find out what numbers you can use is to list all of  the possible factors of  the constant term of  the quadratic equation.
Why? Because when you multiply this thing back out using FOIL, you know that those two numbers multiplied together will end up as the constant in your equation.
Once you know that these are the options, then you move on to look at the x term, 10, in our case.
Use your new factoring skills and the equation you just wrote for the subterranean president to figure out where the catapult needs to go now.
Yeah! Direct hit! He can run, but he can’t hide...
Use your new factoring skills and the equation you just wrote for the subterranean president to figure out where the catapult needs to go now.
Q: Do I have to write all of those teeny steps? A: Not forever.
Whenever you learn something new, it’s good to write down as much as you can so that you can check your work.
We actually wrote down a few middle steps that make it easier to understand.
The binomial only needs to be written once, not 3 times.
The bottom line is that you should write down as many steps as you need to so that you can understand and complete your work.
Q: Is this just FOIL backward? A: Yes! We’re working on figuring out what two binomials will get you back to where you started.
Why? Because if you apply the Zero Product Rule, you can solve the quadratic!
Q: What are quadratics good for in the real world? A: Quadratic equations can be used to address a whole new set of real world scenarios.
For instance, Jon’s equation is a simplified form of a projectile motion equation that describes how objects will travel in the air.
Quadratic equations are also used to design parabolic microphones, satellite dishes, and suspension bridges.
They are even used to design water fountains like those outside fancy Las Vegas hotels.
Q: How can one equation have two solutions? A: When you have an equation with a degree of two, there are two solutions.
Remember, a solution means a number that makes the equation true; that’s it.
As you check your solutions, you’ll see that there really are two ways to make these equations work.
The process doesn’t change, but if you think back to FOIL, that means two things.
Second, that means when you expand the binomials back out you have to keep that coefficient in mind when you’re getting the x term.
It means you’re looking at a lot more trial and error to get it done.
Q: Can you always factor an equation? A: Yes and no.
There are methods, like completing the square, that allow you to work with fractions to factor any equation.
But it’s tricky and really more of an Algebra 2 topic, anyway.
So what does a quadratic that doesn’t easily factor look like? Good question.
Pi Gamma Delta built a wall! Over night, Pi Gamma Delta got some of  their engineering majors to supervise their pledges and build a wall between the frats.
Now the president figures he’s safe because there’s a lot more than just a couple of  bushes protecting him.
Now you need to figure out another h value: 9 feet.
No problem! Just do what you’ve been doing, and you can find out if  h of  9 feet works.
Can Jon clear the wall? Start back with the original equation and put 9 in for h, then solve.
Just flip the page when you get to a part where you feel you’re stuck...
Can Jon clear the wall? Start back with the original equation and put 9 in for h, then solve.
To get the equation in standard form, we need to get a zero over here.
We need two constants that can be added up to -10, but none of these work!
Scott: Jon, if  we don’t hit these guysTim: Hey, you guys, what’s this thing in the small print on the website?
Tim: It looks a little like the range equation that it came with.
Scott: What about all those other letters: a, b, and c.
Got any ideas where we should put the catapult, Oh Great and Wonderous Pledge Captain?
Then Jon will know if he can whack the Pi Gamma Delta president on his head, even with a wall in the way.
The equation we need to solve This is the equation that Jon found.
We left you plenty of room to work things out!
Try out that weird equation that Scott found and see if you can find x.
Then Jon will know if he can whack the Pi Gamma Delta president on his head, even with a wall.
At this point, we need to split up the formula to deal with that “plus or minus thing.” That means we’ll just have one equation with addition, and one with subtraction.
This is all the information you need to solve this problem.
The tricky part is splitting up the formula for x into two pieces: one with minus and one with plus.
The equation we need to solve This is the equation that Jon found.
This is how you get two solutions to the equation.
Same equation, but one has a plus sign, and the other has a minus sign.
Now, check your work and make sure these solutions are ok.
It works! Now Jon knows where to put his catapult!
Both of  these numbers are the distance from the front of  the catapult to the location where the water balloon will be 9 feet off  the ground.
As long as the catapult is less than 14.54 feet from the wall, it should clear it!
The quadratic formula The other way to solve a quadratic equation besides factoring is by using the quadratic formula.
The quadratic formula is written for the standard form of  a quadratic equation that allows you to solve any quadratic equation, whether or not it can be factored.
The a, b, and c in this equation are the a, b, and c in the standard form of a quadratic.
The quadratic formula is great because you can use it to solve any equation, but it is a bit cumbersome.
To get both solutions for the quadratic (remember, a quadratic has two solutions), you have to work with the “plus or minus” symbol.
To handle that, you simplify the expression once for addition of  the quantity under the root, and a second time for subtraction of  the quantity under the root, like this:
The subscript is just a way to tell the answers apart.
What was that thing that you used? Jon just found it in the small print on the website!
There’s a formula out there that can give you the solution to any quadratic equation—no factoring required— and it’s what was printed on the side of  the box.
Q: Why didn’t we use the quadratic formula first? Isn’t factoring a waste of time?
A: We didn’t do this first because we knew that you would say that! The quadratic formula is fantastic if you can’t factor, but if you can, factoring quickly gives you the whole number solutions.
Another issue with the quadratic formula is that it’s easy to mess up.
You need to watch the order of operations and the square root.
If you get either of those wrong, then your answers will be wrong.
There is a standard for how many decimals you should use, called scientific notation.
For now, let’s say that two to four decimal places is enough.
Q: What if there are fractions for a, b, or c? A: That’s no problem.
You can do two things: First, just go ahead and put the fractions in the quadratic equation and simplify.
It can sometimes be pretty difficult to do that, but if you watch your order of operations, there shouldn’t be a problem.
Q: Will the square root always be a decimal? A: Most of the time it will be, so you’ll need a calculator.
Q: Will real world equations have decimals? A: Most of the time you’ll have decimals.
Unfortunately, the real world tends to be messy and not easily quantified.
A lot of equations deal with real materials (like water or steel) or real phenomenon (like speed) are based on measurement, which typically are written in decimals.
Q: Where did the quadratic formula come from? A: The quadratic formula can be derived using a special factoring technique called “completing the square.” If you use the a, b, and c general constants when you complete the square, you’ll come up with the quadratic formula.
You’ll learn how to complete the square for any equation later on in math...
So what do you do if you come across this now? Keep reading...
You have to get the order of operations right when you’re working with the quadratic formula.
Everything under the radical has to be simplified before you can take the root.
You also have to watch the signs! It’s easy to lose track, so if you need to write all your steps out, that’s a good way to keep from making mistakes.
Tim and Scott pulled out the slingshot from last year to try and ping the vice president of Pi Gamma Delta while Jon’s setting up the catapult again.
Help them figure out where they need to shoot from.
Help them solve the new problem to figure out where they need to be.
Here are two quadratic equation for you to work on—be careful—some weird things are going to happen.
Try to factor it here: Use the quadratic formula here:
You can choose between factoring or using the quadratic formula.
Be careful - some weird things are going to happen.
This equation can’t be factored, so we’ll use the quadratic formula.
To follow the order of operations, work under the radical first.
You can choose between factoring or using the quadratic formula.
There’s a negative number under the radical, so you can’t get the square root.
The numbers under the radical cancel out, so there’s only one answer.
Wait a second! I thought that the quadratic formula was always supposed to work.
With that first one, we’re totally stuck before we even finish under the radical! In the second one, the root just goes away.
And, to really throw you, sometimes the solutions are undefined.
An undefined solution is what we call a solution that forces you to take the square root of  a negative number.
So how do you know what to expect? It’s all about the discriminant.
The discriminant is the portion of  the quadratic formula that is under the radical, that square root sign:
In this case, there’s just a single solution that makes the quadratic true.
Here, there aren’t any real x values that will make the equation true.
This is because you’d have to take the root of  a negative number.
This is the typical situation we’ve been dealing with so far: two solutions that are independent and real.
Most of  the time, people are required to learn about me, but they just don’t appreciate my usefulness.
Discriminant: If  you just run that formula and compare it with zero, you can figure out how many answers you’re looking for with a quadratic equation.
So if  you’re less than zero, the solutions are undefined, right?
There aren’t any real numbers that can be squared to get a negative number.
Discriminant: There’s just one number that works so if  you’re going to solve the equation, you know that you’re only looking for one answer.
Discriminant: Then there are two solutions, like you’d expect for a quadratic equation.
Head First: So it’s a neat little trick to figure that stuff  out, but how does it really help to figure you out first, instead of  just factoring?
If  you know how many solutions you’re after, you’ll know when you get some solutions you’re on the right track.
Discriminant: If  you figure me out and I turn out to be a perfect square, the solutions to the equation may be a round number.
Head First: Just to review, why are the solutions undefined if  you’re negative?
Discriminant: Because you can’t take a root of  a negative number.
Now I think we all have a better understanding of  what you do.
Discriminant: Thank you! I’m so sick of  being seen as a waste of  time.
Possible solutions to the quadratic equation that created the discriminant:
Simplify each discriminant and then match it to the corresponding possible solution to the quadratic equation.
See if you can use just the discriminant to figure this out.
Possible solutions to the quadratic equation that created the discriminant:
Simplify each discriminant and then match it to the corresponding possible solution to the quadratic equation.
Q: Checking my work with the quadratic formula is a pain...
The decimals make checking your work tricky, too, and they make solving the original equation difficult.
Q:Why can’t you take a negative square root? A: Because a negative times a positive is a negative.
A square root is supposed to be two things that are exactly the same multiplied together, and you can’t do that and get a negative.
You can, though, take a cube root of a negative number.
Since a cube root is three numbers multiplied together, a negative times a negative is a positive, times another negative is a negative.
Q: If I want to start with the discriminant, do I have to get the actual solution for it to be useful?
A: You can totally eyeball it! If you get 1 minus some giant number, it’s obviously negative, and that’s all you need.
If you start with the discriminant and it comes out as a perfect square, it’s probably a good idea to try factoring first.
If you factor, you get nice whole number answers, which makes life so much easier.
On the other hand, if you just want to solve an equation, go quadratic, and you’ll get the answer every time.
This is taking too long, and the president’s running around now! We need to get at least one more hit or we’re out.
What heights can we hit? Jon’s water balloon can only go up so high, and there’s a different x for every h.
For every height, where does the catapult need to be? Jon needs the position for aiming, which is x.
Then he can nail the president and get himself  and his fellow pledges into Theta Theta Pi.
After their unsuccessful attempt to hide their president in a hole and behind a wall, Pi Gamma Delta has figured out that Jon can be really exact with his water balloons, if  he has time to calculate.
So now the president has decided he’s going to just keep running around since we can’t work that fast.
To aim the catapult properly, we need to be able to work out two things:
The problem is that we’ve got to solve the quadratic over and over.
We really need to just be able to look these things up somehow...
Just like when we were working with linear equations and wanted to skip calculations, a graph would help us see all possible solutions.
We need to figure out the relationship between distance and height, so for any distance, we know the height to shoot balloons, and vice versa.
So we’re looking for the relationship between two variables, x and h.
If  we had a graph, we could  just read off  points and tell Jon without having to run a bunch of  calculations.
The thing is, this equation has an x2 term in it, so how does that work? It’s probably not a line, is it?
How can you graph x2? We know lots of  stuff  about an equation in the degree of  one: it has a slope, some intercepts, and it’s a straight line.
But a second-degree equation may have some other shape that we don’t know about yet.
We do know that it can have two solutions, not just one, which must mean something about the graph...
The simplest way to plot a graph of  an equation is to plot a few points, and then connect the dots.
Since we don’t know the shape of this graph, let’s start by picking a bunch of  points and plotting them to see what we come up with.
Fill in this chart with the right h for each x.
Plot using the points that you just found on the facing page, and draw the resulting curve.
Fill in this chart with the right h for each x.
Don’t worry if  your curve isn’t exactly a smooth shape.
The point of  the exercise was to have you figure out the general shape of  the equation, not draw a curving masterpiece.
Plot using the points that you just found, and draw the resulting curve.
A parabola is the shape of a quadratic equation A parabola is basically a “U” shape.
The width and placement of  the U-shape changes, depending on the equation.
A parabola is also symmetrical around an axis of  symmetry and it’s lowest (or highest) point is called the vertex.
It’s the most basic parabola, and that makes it a great example to use to talk about the parts of  the graph of  a quadratic equation.
Once you start adding x terms, coefficients, and constants to a quadratic equation, the graph changes.
Jon’s catapult graph was upside down because our quadratic had a -x2 term.
Other coefficients in front of  the x2  affect how wide of  narrow the U-shape is.
The x term and the constant term in a quadratic equation move the basic parabola around on the plane: up, down, or side to side.
The y = x2 parabola is the basic shape of all quadratic equations.
This is an invisible line that splits the parabola in half.
Graphing a parabola depends upon the vertex Once you know what the vertex of  a quadratic equation is, you can pick some points on the left and right of  the vertex to draw a nice curve.
Substitute the x-coordinate for the vertex back into the equation to get the vertical coordinate (h, in our case)
Use and understand the vertex The vertex is either the top or the bottom of  the parabola.
Vertex To finish the graph after you know the coordinates for the vertex, you just need a couple of  points along the two sides of the parabola to finish the graph.
To pick the rest of  the points to graph, just go to the left and the right of  the vertex, and you’ll have the basic shape.
The more you work with quadratics, the more all of this will become second nature.
Here goes - I’ll tell you where the president is if you tell us where to stick the catapult.
Use the graph that you drew to figure out where to put the catapult.
Use the graph that you drew to figure out where to put the catapult.
The catapult won’t go that high! It’s more than the vertex, at 100 feet, so we’ll miss him.
Put the catapult at 13 feet from the flag pole.
Work with the parabola, the SMART way Now that you know all about the shape of  a parabola and how it relates to the equation and the discriminant, we can put it all together and see how everything works.
Evaluate the discriminant to find out how many solutions there will be for the catapult’s quadratic equation.
Two real solutions to the equation indicates two x values where the vertical value (h in our case) is zero.
The parabola can sit two other ways on the Cartesian plane with respect to the x-axis.
Like the picture of  y = x2, the graph sits on the x-axis but won’t cross the axis.
An undefined solution means that the quadratic equation has no number that will work  if  the equation is set to zero.
The solutions for the quadratic equation are the two values that work when the equation is set to zero and where it crosses the x-axis.
The discriminant can help with our graph, too Discriminant values fall into three categories: greater than zero, less than zero, or zero.
We’ve talked about what those values mean for the number of  solutions to a quadratic equation, but what about for the graph of  a quadratic?
So here’s our final graph: Take all that information, and you’ll end up with the same graph as before.
But, this time, we’ve got some built-in checks for our work.
We knew to expect an upside-down parabola, with two real solutions, that crossed the x-axis in two places.
The parabola should be upside down and cross the x-axis twice.
Q: What’s the deal with always having two answers? A: When we talked about the discriminant, there were three different options for answers.
The basic parabola, y = x2, only touches the x-axis at one point, so that’s one solution.
The typical parabola, like the catapult’s, has two solutions and two places it crosses the x-axis.
When we used the quadratic formula to solve this equation, the answers we got were the two places that the parabola crosses the x-axis.
Q: How do I find the vertex again? A: The vertex has a consistent x coordinate,                  .It is a fantastic place to start plotting points because it’s the top (or bottom) of the parabola, and you know that you’ll have symmetrical points on either side of the vertex.
Q: Is there another way to graph a parabola besides plotting points?
We’re just scratching the surface on parabolas, and in order to learn all the deep dark secrets of parabolas, there’s a lot more math involved.
Algebra 2 will explain all of that! For now, we’ll stick with plotting points, usually starting with the vertex.
Q: Which kind of quadratic equations have a graph that is an upside down parabola?
A: If an equation has a negative x2 term, the parabola is upside down, or pointed down.
If the x2 term is positive, then the parabola is upward.
Q: Is there a way to find the axis of symmetry? A: The axis of symmetry is the vertical line that goes through the vertex of the parabola.
So if you think back to the standard form of a vertical line, it’s just x = the x - coordinate of the vertex, which is:
Work with the following quadratics using all of the techniques you’ve learned.
Work with the following quadratics using all of the techniques you’ve learned.
You know this because the coefficient in front of the x2 term is positive.
Either one of these will work, but factoring is easier.
These need to be added (or subtracted) to get the x term the -10x.
You have to have the zero or you can’t use.
Once the equation is in the proper form, you know you’re going to need two binomials that start with x.
Fill them in and you’ve already got half of the terms done!
They have to be multiplied together to get the constant in the quadratic equation (75)
They also need to add together to get the x term (-10x)
Then, expand the binomials you came up with, using FOIL, and make sure that it matches what you started with.
The basic shape of a quadratic equation is called a parabola.
Using the quadratic formula The quadratic formula can be used to solve a quadratic equation of the form:
Greater than zero, there are two real solutions to the quadratic equation.
If it equals zero, there is one real solution, and if it’s less than zero, there are no real solutions to the equation.
The top (or bottom) of a parabola is a _____________
You’ll find that in the real world, many equations are limited.
All my friends say he’s got no range, but at least I’m the master of his domain.
Dude, it’s time to go big time: bigger venues, more fans...
But to get to the next level, we need $52,375 for new equipment.
It’s up to YOU to raise cash for Pajama Death.
After hearing all that you went through to get Paul to their concert, Pajama Death figures you’re a real fan...
They need you to take their future to a higher cash plane.
Your first order of  business? Figure out how much Pajama Death stands to make off  the new reality TV show their label just signed them up for.
That includes advertising revenue, plus ticket sales to live tapings each week.
Write up the equation for the per-show revenue and figure out how much Pajama Death will make if they sell 1,515 tickets to the season premiere.
Your job was to figure out the revenue from doing the TV show.
Total revenue The number of ads per show times the cost per ad.
Sound hokey? In the real world, limits exist all the time.
An equation on paper doesn’t have limits, but problems in the real world do.
Our current equation doesn’t say enough about the problem it models.
Sure, we can solve for R, but there’s nothing to prevent us from accidentally putting in too many seats for x...
Limits for this equation will come from the x vales, not R.
Since R is totally dependent upon x, if  you limit x, which is the number of  tickets, then R will also be limited.
So what do we know about the number of  tickets (x)?
Worst case? The worst case scenario for Pajama Death and ticket sales? Nobody comes.
If  you sell more than that, people are going to be mad because they’ll have nowhere to sit...
How can we turn the these facts into limits for our equation?
An equation to model the revenue is based on the ads per show, the cost per ad, and cost of a ticket, and how many tickets are sold for a show.
A function can be expressed as an equation A function is really just a special type of  equation, and usually carries along some extra information.
And since equations can also be functions, there needs to be different notations for functions, so we can tell what we’re dealing with.
A function isn’t written in terms of  a variable like y, but is instead written like this: f(x)
So we can use the powers of  a function to limit the revenue equation for Pajama Death, we need to rewrite the equation as a function.
To limit the number of  tickets, we’re looking to work with the x variable, right? That means the expression needs to contain x and be set equal to f(x)
So we can dump R, and rewrite this equation as a function:
Fill in the limits for the Pajama Death revenue function.
Equations have limits (most of the time) The real world is full of  limitations like tickets, time available for a TV show, the number of  songs that Pajama Death can sing before they lose their voices...
Fortunately, Algebra just happens to have the perfect thing for this situation: a function.
Among other things, a function can limit certain values for its variables.
For Pajama Death, the limits will be the maximum and minimum number of  tickets, x,  that can be sold.
Those limits will make sure that we don’t go figuring numbers for more seats than there are, and in turn, limits the amount of  money that Pajama Death can make in a show.
The equals sign means something slightly different now, it means “is defined by”
Just like regular variables, a function doesn’t have to be f(x), it can be c(d) or r(x)
In the Pajama Death equation, rewritten as a function, the input would be x, the number of seats sold.
The input limits are the domain of the function All functions have a domain, which is the set of  valid inputs for the function.
The group of  values which is valid for the function is usually written as an inequality.
The domain inequality is in terms of  the input variable, which is the variable inside the parentheses of  the f()
In general, the domain of  a function can be completely arbitrary (based on the problem or it’s situation) or defined because of  the expression itself.
How many tickets you can sell is arbitrary, because it’s dictated by how many seats are in the arena.
This is the worst case - nobody comes The show sells out!
Q: What do you mean, limited because of the expression itself?
A: Many mathematical expressions don’t go on forever, and are self-limiting.
If you have an expression with an x denominator, a parabola that only covers part of the Cartesian plane, or a place where you may end up with a negative square root, the domain is limited due to the expression, not necessarily because of the real world problem the function models.
Only 473? It looks Pajama Death fell a lot short of what it was hoping for, at least for the first show.
That’s what the domain does: gives us all possible input values.
We’re never going to sell out stadiums! We can’t sell out and still not get our gear! That’s a total zero-input situation.
Functions have minimum and maximum outputs Function inputs make up the domain, we know that.
By limiting the numbers that can go into a function, we’re limiting the numbers that can come out of  a function.
If  only 1,511 tickets can be sold, we can figure out the most that f(x) can equal...
These minimum and maximum values are the limits for the output of  the function.
The process of  determining a function’s outputs is called evaluating the function.
So every time you plug in x, and solve for f(x), you’re evaluating the function for a certain input value.
That’s really just like solving the equation, which you’ve done a ton of  times.
So what’s the MAXIMUM we can make? What’s the MINIMUM? Using the domain as the starting point, we can find the minimum and maximum outputs of  a function.
That’s basically saying, how small and how big can f(x) get?
Evaluate the revenue function to determine the maximum amount of money that Pajama Death can make for the rest of the season.
Suppose Pajama Death sold out every remaining show after the poor season premiere sales.
All of the valid outputs are called the range Just as there is a set of  inputs over which the equation is valid (the domain) for every function - there is also a range.
The range of  a function is the set of  numbers over which there are valid outputs.
The range actually provides the minimum of  the function (the lowest possible output) and the maximum (the highest possible output) of  the function.
You write the range like the domain: as an inequality.
Also like the domain, functions are written with their range so you can know the limits of  the function’s outputs.
And, of  course, the range for certain functions will be limited because the graph may not cover the entire Cartesian plane.
Evaluate the revenue function to determine the maximum amount of money that Pajama Death can make for the rest of the season.
Suppose Pajama Death sold out every remaining show after the poor season premiere sales.
This is how much the band would make for one sold out show.
Suppose there are 10 more sold out shows with the one lousy show...
The limits of the domain don’t always give you the maximum and minimum outputs of a function.
In the case of the revenue function, the least value of the domain results in the minimum value of the range, and the highest value for the domain results in the maximum.
If the line had a negative slope, though, the values would be reversed.
If we had a curve, the maximum could be in the middle of the domain!
What we’ve learned about functions so far are some characteristics of  functions: domain, range, inputs, and outputs.
A function is a relation where one input results in a single output.
It can be represented as an equation or as a set of ordered pairs, and has both a domain and a range.
Is there anything else I’ve got to worry about? This stuff seems pretty useful...
The thing about functions is that they aren’t always defined in terms of  equations.
Algebra is really about relations A relation is the general way in which two sets of  numbers go together, and they are usually represented as ordered pairs.
The difference between a relation and an equation is that there does not need to be a pattern in a relation: it can be totally random.
A relation does have a domain and a range, which you can determine directly from reading the ordered pairs.
Let’s look at a simple relation that’s not based on an equation to get an idea of  what we’re talking about:
The domain and range come from reading the points in the relation.
Relation - A set of ordered pairs with a domain and a range.
All you need for a relation is a set of ordered pairs.
It’s a relation that has one output for one input.
No function in sight, but this is still a relation.
These are just the possible values that this relation can take on.
Who am I?A bunch of function terminology, in full costume, are playing a party game, “Who am I?” They’ll give you a clue — you try to guess who they are based on what they say.
Fill in the blanks to the right to identify the attendees.
I can be an equation or a set of ordered pairs, but either way I’m fun!
I represent minimum and maximum outputs of the function, but be careful, you can’t just use the lowest and highest inputs to get me!
I might be a function, but I’m not as organized as an equation, I’m just a set of ordered pairs.
The easy way to tell if ordered pairs or an equation are a function is if you see me around, I’m a dead giveaway.
I might be a function, or I might not, but I define one or more variables in terms of numbers.
Who am I?A bunch of function terminology, in full costume, are playing a party game, “Who am I?” They’ll give you a clue — you try to guess who they are based on what they say.
Fill in the blanks to the right to identify the attendees.
I can be an equation or a set of ordered pairs, but either way I’m fun!
I represent minimum and maximum outputs of the function, but be careful, you can’t just use the lowest and highest inputs to get me!
I might be a function, but I’m not as organized as an equation, I’m just a set of ordered pairs.
The easy way to tell if ordered pairs or an equation are a function is if you see me around, I’m a dead giveaway.
I might be a function, or I might not, but I define one or more variables in terms of numbers.
A function can be an equation, but it can also be a set of ordered pairs.
In that case, the ordered pairs are going to be (input, output)
Ordered pairs probably seem weird, but it’s much easier to figure out the domain and the range - it’s given! And remember, an equation for a line defines an infinite set of ordered pairs.
Q: Are range and domains given, or do I have to figure them out?
Sometimes the domain or the range will be given, sometimes it will be part of the problem statement (like ticket sales), and sometimes you’ll need to figure it out.
A: It means that in a function you won’t get two f(x) values for one x, ever.
That’s something that you’ll need to figure out soon enough, too.
If an equation has multiple output values for one input, it’s not a function.
Q: The ordered pairs look a lot like ordered pairs for graphing.
A: No, you can graph functions just like you graph points or equations.
We’re coming up on the details of how it works, but graphing helps out a lot with functions.
Q: Does the one input, one output thing mean that you can’t have the same f(x) value as an output for different inputs?
Q: Is the maximum of the function the maximum of the range?
But the tricky thing is you can’t necessarily get those values from plugging in the low and high values for the domain to find the range.
Q: Why not? A: Because if your function has any kind of a curve in the middle of your domain limits, you may miss a maximum or a minimum for the function.
For example, if the vertex of a parabola was between the two points for your domain, the maximum range for that function would be based on a value between your domain’s limits, not at one extreme or the other.
A: The definition of a function was created by mathematicians, to make sure everybody’s consistent with what they’re talking about.
Since functions have a domain and a range and represent a set of ordered pairs, they’re a relation.
A relation does not have to have a one output to one input requirement, so it isn’t necessarily a function.
Q: Why would you use a relation? A: It’s a math way to tie numbers together that may not have an easy pattern.
Think about statistics; if you were keeping track of housing data, you’d just need an address and a price.
It really wouldn’t matter what order they were in or how much they each cost.
A function is always a relation, but relations are not always functions.
What does a relation have to do with anything? We were working with functions, and then these things showed up.
What about equations? That’s what we’ve been doing for ages, and now they’re gone.
Same deal as before, though, right? If an equation follows those same rules, one input to one output, it’s a function.
There’s all these rules about what makes up a function, but a relation just has to be any set of ordered pairs.
They’re not gone! Remember, an equation is just a way to write an infinite number of ordered pairs.
The definition of a function is a relation with one output for each input.
That’s a set of ordered pairs that follow some rules.
A function MUST be a relation and MAY be an equation.
They have to be a set of  ordered pairs, and that makes them a relation, too.
But not all sets of  ordered pairs can be expressed as an equation.
An equation in two variables MUST be a relation and MAY be a function.
Since an equation is a list of  an infinite number of  points, that means all equations are relations.
Relations, linear equations, and functions all have a domain and a range.
The domain is the valid input values, and the range is the valid output values.
The domain and range may be infinite, but they always exist.
Relations, linear equations, and functions are all sets of ordered pairs.
An equation is just a set of  (x, y) points if  you graph it.
The same is true for functions and relations, although the ordered pairs don’t have to connect for functions and relations.
Relations, equations, and functions all go TOGETHER These three terms are just different ways to characterize a group of  ordered pairs.
That’s a lot to keep up with, so let’s take a step back and look at all three terms.
How do they relate? How are they the same? When are they different?
Since some functions can be written as an equation, how do you think you work with functions? Can you graph them and solve them?
Constraints on functions allow you to be more realistic in the way math represents the world.
Head First: Hi function! We’ve been learning a lot about you lately.
Head First: But what everyone wants to hear about you, is, how do people work with you? Just like a plain equation?
If  I happen to also be an equation, you can solve me for values in the same way you do with an equation.
Head First: So if  we set f(x) = 0 that’s ok?
That way you can solve for the zeroes of  the function.
Function: Again, if  I’m written as an equation with a domain and range, you can graph me in the much the same way as you would a regular equation.
But you have to show the constraints on the graph.
Head First: Oh, I see, so we should only graph the values where you’re valid, over your domain, for example.
Head First: So really, if  you’re written as an equation, we can just treat you the same as equations?
You can, as long as whatever you’re doing is within my domain and range.
Don’t go drawing a graph that goes too far, or solving me for values that aren’t in my domain.
It means that with me, you can work with more realistic situations.
Now we have a much better idea of  how to work with you...
Not only that, but you know enough from graphing linear equations to know the general shape of  most functions.
You just have to show the domain and range on your graph in some way.
Find the range for the Pajama Death revenue function by graphing the function.
Focus on getting the basic shape, and finding the points at the domain limits.
With a bit of rework, this is now in the y = mx + b format.
This point is a solid circle because it’s a limit of the function’s domain.
Since the scale of the graph doesn’t really work with using the slope, we’ll need another point to plot.
Stop the line here, at x = 1511 with a circle at the end to represent a limit.
This is the possible range of revenue for the function, read right off the graph.
Find the range for the revenue function by reading it off the graph.
When you draw an inequality on the number line, the termination points are solid or empty circles, depending upon the inequality.
Draw an open circle This indicates that the graph goes up to the boundary, but does not include the boundary point.
Function graphs have LIMITS The graph of  a function doesn’t look that much different from the graph of  an equation.
You just have to represent the limits of  the function on the graph.
Even marking the endpoints of  the domain with filled-in dots is familiar: we did that when we graphed inequalities.
Just think of  graphing a function as graphing an equation, with a twist.
Graph the basic equation on a scale of f(x) vs.
Just substitute the f(x) values for y on a typical Cartesian plane, and go ahead and graph your function.
So you’ll usually have an x axis, and an f(x) axis.
Look at the domain for the function and remove the graph outside of the domain.
Erase, scratch out, don’t graph that part, but remove the pieces that don’t matter.
Since our graph is less than or equal to for both domain values, we have two solid points.
Read all the values you need directly off the graph.
Just like when you graphed a linear equation, now you can get any value you need.
This includes the range, even when it’s not a linear equation.
Q: How can I figure out the domain of my function? A: It depends upon how the function is presented.
If it’s given as an equation in a problem, analyze the problem situation and see what limits there are.
If the function is a set of ordered pairs, the domain can be read directly from the points presented.
Q: How do I find the range of my function? A: The best, easiest way is to graph the function and then read the range points off your graph.
Why? Because if anything weird happens to the equation (or with the points) between the boundaries of the domain, you’ll see it.
Q: Can I just evaluate the function for the upper and lower values for the domain and get the range?
This really only works if you have a line with a positive slope.
If you have a quadratic, with the vertex between the boundary points, that won’t work at all.
Unless you are positive that you know exactly what is going on with an equation or a relation presented, it’s best to graph your relation and then determine the range.
Q: What’s the difference between the range and the maximum and minimum values?
The range is all the f(x) values the equation can take on.
The maximum and minimum values for the function are the boundary values...
Q: How can you tell if an equation is a function? A: An equation is a function if and only if for each input there is a single output.
That means for each x, there is only one f(x) value.
If you think about it, there’s a way to see it on a graph, too...
The best way to find the range of a function is to read it off a graph.
They need to know the range of outputs for the mics so they can buy the right PA for their stage rig.
This needs to be an open circle, because it’s greater than.
They need to know the range of outputs for the mics so they can buy the right PA for their stage rig.
This is a case where if you had just put in the endpoints of the domain, you wouldn’t have gotten the right range boundary values.
There’s an input - the seat number - and an output - the customer ID who’s sitting in that seat.
So is this a general admission seating thing? Or do we have to.
Jot down some ideas of how you could check to see if the relation between seats (s) and customer IDs (c) a function.
In a function, we can only have one f(x) for every x, and that’s what we want here.
We don’t want any duplicate f(x) values, because that would mean two customer IDs are associated with the same seat.
Graphing reveals the nature of a relation The difference between having the seat assignments right and wrong  is exactly the same as the difference between a relation and a function.
If the seating assignments are one input to one output, then everybody has somewhere to go...
If  not, there are going to be fist fights over a relation that should have been a function, but wasn’t!
Let’s downshift and examine the difference in the graphs of  two sets of ordered pairs; one that’s just a relation and one that is actually a function.
A vertical line is not a function! A function can’t have more than f(x) for any x.
That’s like saying for a given x value, there can’t be two points lined up vertically:
For this one x value, there are TWO f(x) values...
Functions pass the vertical line test This whole “looking at the graph” thing is called the vertical line test.
It’s based on the fact that if  you have two points that are vertically stacked, anywhere on a  graph, then that graph is NOT a function.
So if  a vertical line passes through two points on the graph, it’s NOT a function.
To test a graph, you can use a ruler, your eyeball, or run the edge of  a piece of  paper over the graph to see if  it’s a function.
If the seats aren’t a function, which seat needs to change to make it a function?
This relation didn’t pass the vertical line test at s = 110, so that’s the s value that need to generate different c values.
If the seats aren’t a function, which seat needs to change to make it a function?
Customer 40 needs to be reassigned to a different seat.
A graph allows you to use the vertical line test and see if it’s a function.
Q: So, should I always graph a function? A: It depends upon what you’re after.
A graph of a function, equation, or relation, is the best way to visually look at the situation and it does give you valuable information, but there are some limits.
You are limited to what you can actually read from the graph.
If there are decimals involved, or the scale of your graph is large, it can be difficult to read values.
If you are in a test situation and you’re only after a specific value, then just evaluate the function for your specific value, and move on.
Q: Can you really just treat functions like equations? A: It’s a really good starting point.
If a function is represented as an equation, you can solve for the zeroes of the function, and then graph the function.
The only things to watch are that you limit the graph properly (keeping the domain and range in mind) and substitute 0 for f(x)
Q: Is it always f(x)? Can it be, like, f(t) or something? A: Sure! It’s typically f(x), but that’s not required.
The format is really what you’re looking for; it can be r(q) or g(t) too.
The axes on any graph will need to be adjusted, but other than that, everything else would be the same.
The thing is, functions are just more realistic in most cases.
The real world has limits, and with functions you can easily communicate what those limits are and see them on a graph.
What’s going on? During the sound check we had VIPs showing up with free tickets.
The second show is starting, and now there are free tickets? How does that change things? After running back to check the fine print, there was a clause in the contract that you (and Pajama Death) missed!
Apparently, the network can issue 350 free tickets per show to VIPs.
The FIRST 350 tickets are always free! Wow, this complicates things.
But for each show, the first 350 seats are given away, no charge (and no revenue for Pajama Death)
Then, the rest of  the seats are sold at the normal rate.
This is fine - the domain is still in terms of x, so the function is too.
So this domain changes, and so does the function output for that domain.
That means the equation is almost the same as before...
We have to pull out the first 350 tickets, since those all go for free now.
One function, two parts = real life These functions can be treated together, as long as you keep track of where things are happening.
When you have a situation like this, where the function needs to have different values over different parts of the domain, is called a piecewise defined function.
We show this as one big function, with different domains, like this:
This bracket means that you have to consider the equations together.
Each domain is written next to the equation the domain applies to.
So now we’ve got two different functions, each with a separate equation and domain.
How do you evaluate a piecewise defined function? You can’t figure out Pajama Death’s income until you know how to do that...
So this function behaves differently based on the input domain.
Use the function piece you NEED This is another case where it’s pretty important to keep in mind what your function represents.
In the real world, you have to consider an entire situation, and with piecewise functions, the domain is the key.
Since you have different equations applying to different inputs (in this case, x values), you just need to determine which equation applies to the situation you’re working on..
Evaluate only the portion of the function that applies to the domain.
Use the correct equation, evaluate, and use or plot your answer.
After you have a value to evaluate, determine where the value falls in your function’s domain.
Graph piecewise functions just like “normal” functions! Graphing is much like it was for regular functions.
You just graph the equation that applies, over the domain where it applies.
So you’ll have a different section of  your graph for each piece of  the function...
That’s why the function’s called piecewise in the first place.
The conventions for the points at the end of  the domain are the same: solid circles and open circles, depending on the type of  inequality.
To evaluate a piecewise function What happens if  you need to evaluate the function for a number? You just see what domain that number falls in, and use the matching equation to evaluate for that value.
Piecewise functions are just a series of functions grouped together.
Show both sections of the domain in one graph to see the entire picture of what’s going on.
The new graph will show you all the possible revenue values for each type of ticket sales.
Graph both sections of the domain in one graph to see the entire picture of what’s going on.
The new graph will show you all the possible revenue values for each type of ticket sales.
We can use the boundary points to graph this one because it’s linear - if it was a parabola we’d need to use the vertex.
You need to go back and re-figure the first show revenue with the VIP tickets in mind, and then crunch the rest of  the season numbers.
Using the graph for the revenue, fill out the chart to find out if Pajama Death made enough money to go shopping!
Using the graph for the revenue, fill out the chart to find out if Pajama Death made enough money to go shopping!
Don’t worry if the values you read off the graph aren’t exactly the same.
Since the graph is large, you have to estimate some.
Pajama Death’s show was a hit! The show got way more popular and Pajama Death made enough money to buy everything they wanted.
Now they’re going to make that new album and play huge concerts, all thanks to you! Now that you helped them understand how much money they can make, they might take this music thing seriously!
Couldn’t have done it without you, so we wrote you a song.
Look at the piecewise function and graph it to determine the range.
Look at the piecewise function and graph it to determine the range.
The second piece of the function is a linear equation, so just using the boundary points is fine.
Same deal with the last piece of the function, it’s linear.
Since the boundaries of the domain are on the right and left of the vertex, we’ll use them for points.
But be careful about what type of points you’re plotting...
Just because it’s one function, it doesn’t mean that the points all have to match up.
It’s your standard crossword; all of the solution words are from this chapter.
A way to limit an equation is to write a __________
The best way to go about finding the range is to graph.
There are some cases (like linear equations) where you can easily tell what the range will be - but typically graphing is the way to go.
Once you know the domain, it’s just a matter of cutting off the graph and interpreting what’s left.
If you have a graph and you can read the value.
This just means that you are given an input and they are looking for the output.
The hardest part about this question is understanding what it’s asking!
The limit on the inputs of a function is the [DOMAIN]
The limit on the outputs on a function is the ________
A way to limit an equation is to write a __________
So what's that good for? Well, in this chapter, it's all about the.
By the time you're done, you'll have won friends, influenced people, and saved.
So I factored in how much you loved me, solved for the price of this car, and you're right...
I’ve got some money saved up, and I’m going to get a great job when I graduate in 9 months.
Now look what can I do to get you in this car, today? I've got nointerest, low-interest, long-term...
Budget? No worries, we'll get you way more car than you thought you could afford.
Wow, can you say used-car salesman? Better watch out for this guy...
Max has a lot to think about to get into the car of his dreams.
Here are just a few of the pieces of paperwork Max has to consider...
What are the algebraic unknowns you’ll need to deal with?
What kinds of things are going to affect the costs of Max's car? (What are things going to be “in terms of”?)
Compare this vehicle to others in the FREE GAS MILEAGE GUIDE available at the dealer.
What are the algebraic unknowns you’ll need to deal with?
What kinds of things are going to control the costs? (What are things going to be “in terms of”?)
Your job was to write down some of the things Max has to think about when it comes to buying a car.
We’re going to have to deal with the cost of the car, car insurance, car loan rates, how much money Max can put down, and how long he wants to take a loan for.
There are a lot of things that go into buying a car, but most of these depend on how much the car costs, right?
Ok, so his savings has to be 9 months times whatever his monthly payment is, plus his down payment.
We can write that as an equation like this: savings = down payment + 9 (monthly payment) Then we just solve for the monthly payment.
And don’t forget that Max has 9 months of school left before he even gets a job!
Oh wait! If we have it as a function, then we can graph it, right?
Yeah, and that’s going to depend on how much of a down payment Max can put together.
Since he doesn’t have a job, his down payment and monthly payments have to come from savings.
We have to write this as a function and limit the domain and range.
Yup! And that will show us down payments versus monthly payments.
The dealership says we have to have at least $1000 down, and the payments obviously can’t be negative.
Write Max’s equation as a function, find the domain and the range, and graph it.
How much can he afford per month for a car?
Write Max’s equation as a function, find the domain and the range, and graph it.
Using that information, how much can he afford per month for this car?
We want d(m) in terms of months, so let's isolate d(m) and think in terms of the down payment.
The down payment has to be at least $1000, and less than Max's total savings.
What does this graph really mean? It’s showing that the higher the down payment, the smaller the available monthly payment.
And that will max out how much he can spend on a car.
The total loan is going to be the principle he borrows plus the interest they charge him.
We know what Max can pay each month, but not all that money goes to his car...
Ok, and from Max’s perspective, he needs to pay it off by the monthly payments times the number of payments he’s going to make, like this: total loan = monthly payment x number of payments.
Right, so $550 is spread out over interest and the principle.
We need to figure out what kind of loan he can work with.
Some of these questionable dealers are charging ridiculous interest rates.
So Max can pay $550 a month, but it's not all actually paying for his car, right?
Combine the two equations from the guys' IM chat to get one equation that allows us to solve for Max's monthly payment.
Combine the two equations form the guys' IM chat on page 427 to get one equation that allows you to solve for Max's monthly payment.
We can fill in the things we know and then solve for the rest.
With interest rates and terms, we should be able to fill in the rest of  that equation, too.
But how much is my interest? My bank sent me to this website, but I don't know what any of this really means...
And we know the interest rates from each of  those terms.
What we need for our equation, though, is the amount of  interest.
Well, you can Google "simple interest," but we've done that for you.
Here's an equation to give you the interest based on a term and principle:
If you look up a simple interest equation, you will find an equation like this.
The bank offers three different terms, and the interest will be different for each term.
So we need to figure out the total interest for each term, and then plug that back into our original equation to get Max's monthly payment:
Watch that your numbers are in the right form (decimal form of the percent)
This means simple interest - there’s also compound interest, but you don’t need to worry about that here.
Now that we know the total amount of  interest in the first option, we can figure out the monthly payment for Max's dream car on a 3-year term:
I can’t afford that! What about the longer terms? I really want that car!
What is the real price of the car when you include interest for the different loans? What if Max could make a larger down payment? What if he waited until closer to graduation so he could pay more per month when he gets his job?
This is the total interest to be paid over the life of the loan.
Sweet! It works! Max can afford his car if he takes the longest loan.
Q: Why is the interest equation so complicated? A: The equation that we’re using for interest is a standard equation for figuring out simple interest.
It's actually not that complicated, although the unusual letters and terms do make it look a bit trickier at first glance.
Q: How does that interest equation really work? A: This equation: is actually fairly simple.
It states that the total interest of the loan is the interest rate times the amount borrowed, multiplied by the time the money is borrowed over.
The lesson here? Two things really drive up the cost of a loan: how much your interest rate is, and how long you borrow the money for.
Q: When I figured out the interest, it was more for the five year loan, but the monthly payment was lower.
A: With the way the loan works, the time factor is a bigger influence than the interest rate.
Adding a year onto the loan adds 12 more payments.
So there's a lot more interest, but it's spread out over 12 extra months.
It’s worth noting in the long term, a longer loan will make the car cost quite a bit more.
A shorter loan would mean less interest and would cost Max less overall.
In the real world, equations often need to be limited and turned into functions.
Calculating interest is just solving an equation for an unknown.
But, buddy, what about gap insurance? You need that, you know? Oh man, you never heard of gap insurance? You don’t want your lovely new car to look like this, right?
We’ll need to run some numbers to figure it out...
So, what this "salesman" is trying to sell is called gap insurance.
It covers the gap between what a car is worth and what is still owed to the bank.
Wow, seriously? So Max could end up owing the bank more money? Kristina.
Well, you know how cars depreciate right away? The problem is that cars depreciate really quickly at the beginning and end up being worth less than you owe.
Well, Max won't really end up owing more, his car is just worth a lot less.
Well, as soon as he drives off the lot, the car is worth about $20,000 because of depreciation.
Wow, he’d still owe the bank $8,800 and not have a car anymore?
But that's one more thing to pay for, isn't it? Can Max even afford that? Is it worth it?
So if he’s in an accident on his way home from the dealer, then he gets $20,000 back from the insurance company, since that’s what his car’s worth.
But he'll still owe the bank the entire $28,800? That seems pretty unfair...
Tires, brakes, fluids, and wear on the engine happen every mile that you drive.
That’s why used cars are less expensive than new cars.
Depreciation is the term that is used to describe exactly how much value a car has lost.
The depreciated value is the value of  the car minus the depreciation.
In other words, it's what the car is worth at a particular moment in time.
Unfortunately, cars lose about 20% of  their value as soon as you drive them off  the lot.
Then they lose their remaining value over about 10 years, at which point they’re basically worthless.
The value of  the car, then, is actually dropping faster than you're paying the bank.
So there's a gap between what you owe the bank, and what your car is worth:
Your amount owed goes down at a fixed rate as you pay the bank each month.
Your car is usually worth less than you actually owe, though.
Max's car is worth only $20,000 once he drives it off the lot.
You need to figure out some functions to model the gap.
Write a function for Max’s loan balance, and the piecewise function for depreciation.
These functions should both be v(t), values related to time.
Write a function for Max’s loan balance, and the piecewise function for depreciation.
Put it all together, and here is the total gap situation:
Systems of equations and systems of functions can be handled exactly the same way.
This number is the total cost of the loan: principle plus the interest we figured out earlier.
Use minus because each payment is lowering what you owe.
Piece one of the function less the depreciationThis is 20% of the initial.
Piece two of the function First, figure out what the car is worth after the initial drop.
We know the car's going to drop over 10 years.
This is true for the rest of the life of the loan: 60 months.
The domain for this function starts when Max buys his car, and goes for 60 months (five years), the term of his loan.
This is only true for the first month, piece 1 of the function.
If we graph them, we’ll "see" the gap, and we can solve for where the gap stops.
Graph both functions to "see" the gap.We got you started by graphing the first part of the depreciation graph.
Your job was to graph the system of equations representing the gap.
This is the gap! The distance between these two lines is what Max would owe at any point.
This intersection point is where Max's car is worth exactly as much as he owes the bank.
Max has a gap to worry about for over 25 months.
What should Max do? Should he buy gap insurance? If so, which option is better?
Let me just get you to sign right here next to Option 2, and you won’t have to worry your pretty head about this gap business...
You don't need to GUESS with Algebra Max definitely needs some type of  gap insurance to cover him while his car is worth less than he owes.
Between the graph, the functions, and your mad Algebra skills, you can figure this out.
You need to determine Max’s maximum potential risk at any time, and how much the different gap insurance options cost.
You also need to think about his monthly budget and the overall cost of  each gap insurance option.
But that's not the only thing Max needs to worry about.
Determine Max's leftover balance from his initial purchase and make sure he can afford either premium for gap insurance.
Figure out the worst case gap over the first 18 months (that’s Max’s risk), and the total premium that he’ll pay for this option's coverage.
Using the new information and the graph of  the gap, what’s the smart plan? Which option should Max choose?
This insurance will cover any gap that exists at the time of  an accident.
This insurance will cover any gap that exists at the time of  an accident.
Your job was to choose the smartest insurance for Max.
The premium is $20 a month, which Max can definitely afford.
The premium is $60 a month, so Max can afford that, too.
Sweet! It works! Max can afford his car if he takes the longest loan and have $70 leftover..
We figured this out way back on page 432 when Max was picking a loan.
The overall maximum risk is still $8000 in the first few months.
Loan Balance This intersection point is where Max's car is worth exactly as much as he owes the bank.
Max has a gap to worry about for over 25 months.
I'm out of here in my new car! I’m protected from an early accident, and I can make my payments, no problem.
Max plans to pay you to be his financial planner Max is thrilled you saved him so much money and still managed to get him into the car of  his dreams.
He's even promised to keep using you for all his financial decisions....
To get here, you used a lot of  advanced Algebra skills:
Open for business! Since your success with Max, there's a whole line of  people just waiting to pay you for financial advice.
Wrapupcross You did it, you made it through the whole book! But don't relax just yet, there's a crossword to do first...
Even after eating all of this, we’re going to have some left.
You’ve learned a lot in this book, but Algebra has even more to offer.
Don’t worry, we’re almost done!  Before we go, there are a just few gaps we want to fill in.
Negative Exponents We touched on them in chapter 3, but as a quick refresher, here’s what a negative exponent looks like:
What’s going on here? It’s really a matter of  cancelling things out...
Since both approaches are both valid, the answers are the same.
A negative exponent means that you divide one by the exponential term, with its exponent stripped of  its negative sign.
Negative exponents are a great way to get rid of  fractions.
Any fraction can be rewritten as a negative exponent, and you can work with it the same way you would work with any other exponent.
Combine that rule with multiplying exponential terms, and you can divide exponential terms too, like this:
Working with negative exponents The only difference in working with negative exponential terms and regular exponential terms is keeping track of  the sign.
Just do the same thing for any other operation as it comes up.
Negative exponents also give you flexibility If  you come across an exponential term in a denominator, you can write it as a negative exponent and remove the fraction.
Then you can manipulate the equation the way you want to.
Table of values for graphing We mentioned them a couple of  times, and even showed one, but what exactly is a table of  values?
A table of  values is a table that is set up with both of  the variables that are in an equation and allows you to easily keep track of  the results for different substitutions.
It’s another way to keep track of  points for graphing.
For lines, it’s not typically necessary because you only need two points, but for other shapes...
This table shows the equation, the x values, and the resulting h values.
You can set one of  these up for any equation you’re graphing, if you think it will help you keep track of  what’s going on.
Since the equation is quadratic, it’ll be a parabola.Start with these values and fill in the rest...
Absolute value equations You’ve learned a lot about how to manipulate and solve equations, but we didn’t get to cover how you handle an equation when there’s an absolute value in there.
You know how to handle the absolute value of  a number, but what if  you have a variable inside the absolute value signs that you want to isolate? When you have an equation with an absolute value, even though there is only one unknown, there are two solutions.
This must be true because you strip the number of it’s sign with the absolute value.
What happens if  there’s more than one term inside the absolute value signs? If  that happens, you have to treat the whole quantity inside the absolute value as an unknown, and isolate it before you can do anything else.
You have to treat the “x + 3” part as an unknown and isolate it.
To remove an absolute value, you need to isolate it, and then solve whatever’s left using an option for both signs.
Calculators Generally, the work in this book can be completed by hand (if  you have enough paper)
If  you used a calculator, it didn’t need to be anything past a basic calculator with exponents.
There are a lot of  calculators out there that can graph, solve equations, and plug and chug the quadratic formula for you.
The point of  this book and the material in it is to learn how to manipulate the first level of equations while understanding what is going on.
If  you simply plug things into a calculator, what you’ve really understood is how to work your calculator!
As you progress in math, you’ll need to use technology more - but not yet!
More practice, especially for factoring The best way to get good at all of  this work is to practice it more.
Working through the exercises in this book is a great start, but you should pull out your classroom textbook and work on those problems, too.
This book describes all of  the principles you’ll need to work in most Algebra I textbooks, and the more you work on them, the better you’ll get.
Factoring, in particular, is a skill that you will be able to do much faster the more you do it.
I didn’t start out as a prima ballerina—first there were little tutus.
Suppose you’re rolling along and realize that you forgot how to multiply.
Algebra starts with numbers If  the you hear the weatherman say it’s “minus five,” you know that it’s really cold, colder than zero.
Numbers sometimes need to indicate that they are less than 0, and they do that by adding a negative (or minus sign) in front of  the number.
What are the other numbers, the plain ones? Those are positive numbers.
They are indicated by no sign or a positive sign.
If  you’re working with whole positive and negative numbers, it means that you’re working with integers.
How do you work with negative numbers? Operations with negative numbers are similar to operations with positive numbers; you just have to keep track of  the sign of  the numbers that you’re dealing with.
The first thing to understand is how the negative and positive numbers relate to each other.
To determine the relationship between integers, plot both numbers on a number line.
That’s because the left side of  the number line is headed off  to negative infinity, a very, very small number.
The number farthest to the right is always the larger number.
Since as you go farther to the right on the number line, you are closer and closer to positive infinity—a huge number.
Use the number line above to plot the relationships and fill in less than or greater than signs.
Use the number line above to plot the relationships and fill in less than or greater than signs.
With negative numbers, the more negative a number is, the smaller it is.
Addition and subtraction of integers You’ve probably been adding positive numbers for ages, so you have no problem with that.
The good news is that when you’re working with numbers of  the same sign, there are some simple rules to follow.
With two negative numbers, just add the number part first and put a negative sign in front of  it; that’s it.
Move left on the number line for negative numbers, move right for positive numbers.
Did you notice that there’s no “subtracting positive numbers” on that list? Now that you’re working with integers, the line between addition and subtraction gets a bit murky.
Subtracting a number is the same thing as adding a negative number.
How do you know? To actually perform the operation, you can work with the number line.
The rules are simple: for every negative number (or subtraction), move left on the number line, and for every positive number (or addition), go to the right.
Multiplication and division of integers To multiply and divide integers, you use the same operations as with regular positive numbers, with a few simple rules about how you work with the signs.
When you come across an integer multiplication problem, first figure out the number piece:
This is what you need to learn the rules about.
Now that you know where you need the rules, here they are.
Remember, you just carry out the multiplication (or division) as you would for positive numbers, and then add the sign in front to get your answer.
A positive number multiplied or divided by a positive number is a positive number.
So, you figure out the number part, and that’s it.
A negative number multiplied or divided by a negative number is a positive number.
A negative number multiplied or divided by a positive number is a negative number.
So, if  the numbers are mixed, the negative sign carries.
You can use the number line, too, but since they’re both negative, you can just add them up and keep going.
There’s only one negative, so it stays negative Remember, the number.
If you add a positive number, go to the right.
Absolute Value Absolute value is the operation of  stripping an integer of  its sign.
The upshot of  that, of  course, is that all of the numbers end up positive.
How do you treat the absolute value sign and the numbers inside it? The absolute value sign acts like parentheses; you have to do what’s inside it first and then take off  the sign.
So if  it shows up in an expression you’re working with, you have to handle it before moving on.
If  you think of  the absolute value sign as a brick wall, that might help.
Absolute value means take the sign away from the number.
What absolute value means Absolute value really means the distance between a number and zero on the number line.
It’s important in cases where you’re more interested in difference than direction.
The number alone tells you how far you’ll travel, and the sign tells you the direction you’ll move in—to the left of  zero, if  the sign is negative, or to the right of  zero, if  the sign is positive.
Absolute value means caring about the distance, not the sign.
Absolute value is always positive; it’s the distance from zero to the number.
Absolute value - The absolute value of a number is the value of the number without its sign.
It is the distance of the number from zero on the number line.
Remember, you’re looking for the distance between zero and the number.
It doesn’t matter which sign is there; the absolute value means take it away.
Remember, you’re looking for the distance between zero and the number.
Same deal here - inside first, then the absolute value.
Q: What is absolute value used for in the real world? A: Distance is, at its core, just absolute value.
It’s the answer to “How far are you going?” It doesn’t matter which way, so you’re the distance you give will always be positive—an absolute value.
Since temperatures are measured in terms of above and below zero, you may need to know how much the temperature needs to be raised.
Q: Isn’t the number line a little juvenile? A: No, the number line is a great, easy way to keep track of what’s going on when you’re adding positive and negative numbers.
Don’t feel like you need to use something complicated just because you’re getting ready for Algebra!
Q: What if we have three integers that are multiplied together? Which sign wins?
A: If you have a string of integers multiplied together, here’s the deal: If it’s all positive, the answer’s positive.
If you have an even number of negative signs, then the answer is positive.
If you have an odd number of negative signs, the answer is negative.
Q: Zero is an integer, too? A: It sure is.
It’s included because the integers are really whole numbers, so you need to keep the zero.
Stay tuned, later in the chapter, we’ll learn about zero and how it works.
Q: What if my integers get really big? Then the number line won’t work as well?
You might not be able to count out your answer, that’s true, but you could draw a number line with the tick marks meaning 10’s, for example.
Q: Is subtraction done? A: It’s just a matter of perspective, really.
Subtraction and addition of a negative are the same thing.
That being said, it doesn’t really matter what you call them; you do the same thing to deal with the operation.
The big take away from this is that you can put the negative inside the parentheses and work with it that way if it’s easier in any given situation.
Counting numbers (they started with fingers and toes) That’s 0 balloons.
This is pi - it never repeats and it never ends!
Number sets - all together Number sets are a way of  grouping number types, like integers.
Knowing how to group numbers together can help you learn how to work with them when you go into Algebra.
The smallest set of  numbers is the counting numbers, the whole numbers are just the counting numbers with zero, the integers are all of  the counting numbers and the negative numbers, and so on.
There’s also a set of numbers called the imaginary numbers, but we’ll leave that for another book.
The numbers listed are included in the set and also establish the pattern for the rest of the set.
The number sets In mathematics, there is a typical notation for sets of  numbers.
They’re just the numbers that you use to count things.
It’s also the first set of  numbers that you work with when you’re learning about math.
The whole numbers are just the counting numbers and zero.
You’ll see them more and more as you get into geometry and the real world, but there are numbers that go on and on—non-repeating and non-terminating decimals.
There are square roots that go on forever, and there’s pi, the ratio between the circumference and diameter of  a circle.
Three ways to split things up It’s important to be able to communicate a piece of  a whole thing, and there are three ways you should be familiar with: fractions, decimals, and percentages.
Now we need to figure out how to work with all these different kinds of numbers.
The form of this part is specific, we’ll get into it later.
We’re talking about less than one pie, so this is zero.
This notation is really just a tweak of  the decimal.
Do you see a relationship between the percent and the decimal?
Decimal’s Anatomy Decimals are the easiest for calculators to work with, and sometimes the easiest for people, too.
Just like whole numbers have ones, tens, and hundreds, decimals have places, too.
The number of  whole things is the number to the left of  the decimal point.
If  it’s less than one thing, then it’ll be zero.
The numbers to the right of  the decimal point communicate that size in pre-determined pieces.
For example, if  a number is in the tenths place, it is that many tenths.
How decimals communicate Just by having the format of  a decimal, you can tell two big things about the number.
If you need to deal with parts, and you need to deal with a calculator, you’re probably going to need decimals.
Addition and subtraction with decimals Addition and subtraction with decimals are almost exactly the same as addition and subtraction with whole numbers, but you must line up the decimal points.
Just like with whole numbers, with decimals, you have to add the right place, so tenths must be added to tenths, hundredths to hundredths, etc.
The way to do that is to make sure that the decimal points line up.
Decimal points are lined up Tenths are in line with tenths.
Adding the columns up is exactly the same as with whole numbers.
The decimal point in the answer is in the same spot as it is in t.
Here we put the numbers all the way on the right.
Where does the decimal go? Since they’re not lined up, you can’t tell...
If you just add up the numbers on the right, you’re adding tenths to hundredths.
Carrying across columns is the same as it is with whole numbers.
Subtraction works the same as addition, just line up the decimal points, and you’ll be ok.
When you add and subtract decimals you must line up the decimal points.
Complete the addition or subtraction and solve the given problems.
Ella, Sam’s sister, just got her birthday money, and she has $80 to spend.
You have to add the decimal point and two zeros.
Add a zero to help keep track of the decimal places.
You can add up as many decimals as you want.
Just line up the decimal points and add them up!
Ella, Sam’s sister, just got her birthday money, and she has $80 to spend.
Then you can subtract that value from her birthday money.
Decimal multiplication Multiplying decimals is almost the same as multiplying whole numbers; however, there is a twist at the end.
You can set up a decimal multiplication problem exactly the same way you would whole numbers: line the numbers up on the right, and start multiplying.
After you’ve multiplied the first number by each digit of  the second number, you can add them up.
The last step, the one that’s different with decimals, is you need to count the number of  places to the right of  the decimal point in both of  the factors, and then put that total number of decimal places in the answer.
Carry out the multiplication and addition steps, just as you would with whole numbers, ignoring the decimal points for now.
The last step is to count the decimals in the factors of the problem, and put the total number of  places back into the solution.
In decimal multiplication, count the total number of decimal places in the factors.
Decimal division Dividing numbers with decimals is similar to regular long division, but with some minor changes.
Before we can talk about it, a quick refresher on some terms.
If  you’re dealing with decimals, take regular long division and make the following changes:
If there’s a decimal point in the divisor, you need to remove it.
If  you have a decimal point in the divisor, you need to eliminate it.
First, move the divisor decimal point to the right as many times as you need to make the divisor a whole number.
Then, move the decimal point in the dividend the same number of places to the right.
If there is a decimal point in the dividend, then put the decimal point in the same place in the solution above.
After setting up the problem, just stick the decimal point in the solution right above it.
If  there was no decimal point in the divisor, then divide exactly the same way you would with whole numbers.
If  you moved the decimal in step one, remember to use the new position.
Let’s do some division! Here’s a problem with all kinds of  twists and turns.
It has two decimals and there are some tricks you’ll need to make it through.
Ok - so there’s a decimal point in the dividend and the divisor, so we’ll need to use both tricks up there.
First, you’ll need to set up your equation in a long division format...
No calculators please! We’re trying to learn how to do this by hand, after all.
If the divisor has a decimal point, move it to the right until you have a whole number.
Then move the same number of  places in the dividend.
After that’s done, write the decimal point in the solution in the same place as in the dividend.
Remainders don’t exist for you anymore! Since you’re working with decimals, you can add a zero to the dividend without changing any values, and keep on going.
Just don’t forget to put a zero in your solution when you need to add a zero to the dividend.
When you finish a division with no remainder, you’re done!
We moved the decimal point one place in the divisor to get a whole number.
Special decimals There are a couple of  special cases that you need to be prepared for with decimals.
When you start to see that happening, just write what you have, and add a note that it doesn’t terminate.
This bar means the number after the decimal is repeating.
Q: With repeating decimals, will it just be one number?
These numbers are written with a bar on top of the entire sequence that repeats:
Q: How do I know if it’s a nonterminating, non-repeating, or just a long sequence that repeats?
A: Most of the time, the problem will tell you how many decimals to use before you decide.
For example, it may say, “Only take the division out 5 places.”
Q: How do you use repeating decimals? You can’t add them to other numbers, right?
A: With repeating decimals and nonterminating, non-repeating decimals, it’s much easier to work with them as fractions.
Q: Why can you just add zeros on the end when dividing by decimals?
A: Since the zero comes after the decimal, it’s not changing the value of the dividend at all.
Adding the zero is a trick that makes it easier to finish long division.
You can add as many zeros as you need after the decimal, but don’t forget about repeating and non-terminating, non-repeating decimals.
If you go out 4 places and still don’t have an answer, you can stop.
Just because you don’t start with decimals, doesn’t mean you won’t end up there.
You can add as many zeros as you need after the decimal, but don’t forget about repeating and non-terminating, non-repeating decimals.
If you go out 4 places and still don’t have an answer, you can stop.
The only new thing you have to do is put the decimal point in here.
Just because you don’t start with decimals, doesn’t mean you won’t end up there.
So this decimal point has to move the same two places.
You’re 100% right! Decimals and percentages are almost the same thing.
Percentages are just a convention that we use to work with decimals, primarily those between zero and one.
There are a lot of  times when you need to talk about some consistent piece of  something that’s between zero and one—tax rates, contribution rates...
Just convert them back to decimals and work with them that way.
To convert a percent to a decimal, just move the decimal point two places to the left.
Q: Does it work the other way—going from a decimal to a percent?
If you want to convert a decimal to a percent, just move the decimal point to the right two places.
A: The process stays the same; you move the decimal two places to the left.
The number that you come up with at the end will be over one, that’s all.
A:It sure can, and we’ll find out how to do it soon.
For now, just remember that all of these things—decimals, percents and fractions— are all ways to work with parts of numbers.
Working with percents With a typical percentage problem, you’re looking for some percent of something, like sales tax.
In chapter 1, we help Jo buy a game console, and when you buy something, you have to pay the taxes:
Let’s figure out how much we’ll have to pay in taxes.
To find the percent of  something, there a three steps.
You need to find the percentage of the base price, $199
You do that my simply moving the decimal point in the percent two places to the left.
The value you’ll get is the result you’re looking for!
System o Games A variety of games for the oPOD system (HD-ISH-5309)
Gaming Headset Headset with microphone, ideal for online gaming (HS-AL1-867)
Percent Magnets Use the magnets to complete the problems with percents.
Really Big Mall is trying to decide if  their customers would use Wi-Fi in the mall if  it was installed.
Percent Magnets Solution Use the magnets to complete the problems with percents.
Go the other way - two places to the right.
Really Big Mall is trying to decide if  their customers would use Wi-Fi in the mall if  it was installed.
They’re hard and I don’t see how they help anything.
Once you get the hang of  them, they can be faster and more precise than decimals.
They are a little tricky to get the hang of, so let’s start with a review of  exactly what a fraction means.
Fractions show parts of a whole A fraction tells you how many pieces you have of  something and how many pieces that thing is broken into.
Fractions are a fact of  life, but once you get the hang of  working with them, they’re quite handy.
Keep going, and you’ll be fraction genius in no time.
Fraction multiplication Fraction multiplication is the easiest operation to work with.
You simply multiply the numerators together to get the answer’s numerator, and then multiply the denominators together to get the answer’s denominator.
Fraction division mixes numerators and denominators Fraction division is actually more like multiplication with a twist.
To divide a fraction by a fraction, use a process called cross multiplication.
Multiply the numerators, and write the value as the numerator of  the solution.
Multiply the denominators, and write the value of  the denominator for the solution.
To cross multiply, just multiply the first numerator by the second denominator to get the solution numerator.
Then multiply the first denominator by the second numerator to get the solution denominator.
Multiply the first numerator by the second denominator, and write the value as the numerator of  the solution.
Multiply the first denominator by the second numerator, and write the value as the denominator of  the solution.
What is that? The top is bigger than the bottom! That doesn’t work, does it?
Improper fractions An improper fraction is one where the numerator is larger than the denominator.
Since the numerator is larger, the fraction actually represents more than one.
The numerator of  three means that there are three pieces of  it (more than one total pie)
Divide to make an improper fraction proper To convert an improper fraction to a proper fraction, you need to remember that the line in the fraction means division.
Sometimes (like with multiplication and division) it makes more sense to keep working with the improper fraction.
But what if  you just wanted to know how many pies there are?
Here’s your proper fraction (the official term is a mixed number)
Any remainder of  the division just goes back over your denominator.
The whole number part of  the division stays as a whole number.
More about improper fractions So what if  you had to solve this problem?
You have to make these improper fractions before you can multiply the numerators and the denominators.
That way you only have numerators and denominators and no whole numbers.
This means that you have two wholes and one sixth left over.
To convert an improper fraction, first write the denominator for the solution.
It will be the same as the denominator for the fraction portion of  the mixed number.
To find the new numerator, multiply the whole number times the denominator and add the old numerator.
Convert the following fractions from proper to improper fractions to complete the operations.
Work here to reduce the solution to a proper fraction.
Use this space for reducing back to a proper fraction.
Convert the following fractions from proper to improper fractions to complete the operations.
To multiply fractions, multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators.
This needs to be reduced back to a proper fraction again.
Invert a fraction to get its reciprocal The reciprocal of  a fraction is a fraction with the numerator and denominator switched.
To divide two fractions using this method, you can multiply by the reciprocal instead of  cross multiplying.
I learned how to do fraction division a different way.
Cross multiplication is the method that is the most straightforward, but you can also use the reciprocal.
Replace the division sign with multiplication, and replace the second factor with its reciprocal.
Treat it just like any other multiplication problem and multiply straight across.
Try the same problem using cross multiplication - you’ll get the same answer!
Q: Why do we have to learn fractions? Don’t most people use calculators?
The problem is that when you get to funky decimals like repeating decimals, for instance, it’s actually way easier to work with the fraction.
If you need to carry that small number through a few steps in Algebra, it could get ugly.
A: That is basic number knowledge, and you just have to memorize it.
Knowing that, it’s easy to convert a decimal to a fraction.
Q: Addition and subtraction of decimals are the same as whole numbers?
Q: How long can I keep adding zeroes if I’m dividing?
If you have a repeating decimal, you’ll figure it out pretty fast—probably by the hundredths place.
Otherwise, keep going until you have no remainder or you have enough decimal places that you can answer your question.
Q: Percents are really just decimals? A: That’s right! They were developed so we could easily talk about one hundredth of a thing.
Since that’s also how divide up our money, it’s so convenient!
If you have several steps to go through with multiplication and division of fractions, it’s much easier to keep working with the improper fraction.
If you convert improper fractions in the middle of a problem to a proper fraction (say, a whole number and a fraction), and then you need to multiply, you’ll just end up going back again.
Q: Which is better, cross multiplication or using the reciprocal for fraction division?
Both of them work fine, but for one, you need to rewrite the fraction, and for the other, you don’t.
It may bother you that cross multiplication doesn’t involve writing exactly what you’re doing.
When you write out the reciprocal, the math you’re doing is exactly the same thing, but the notation is different.
Adding and subtracting fractions Addition and subtraction of  fractions are a bit more complicated than multiplication and division.
You can multiply and divide any two fractions without much trouble.
To add and subtract, two fractions must have the same denominator.
Why? Because the answer you are looking for will be in a given denominator, which says how many pieces your whole is cut up into.
You need a common denominator The moral of  the story is that we need to find a way to change the denominator of the fraction without changing it’s value.
But we’ve got a couple things we need to learn about before you can make that happen.
Equivalent fractions get you matching denominators You may remember from your times tables that any number times one is itself.
This one little fact makes it possible to change a denominator without changing the value of  the fraction—the size of the pie piece that you’re going to get.
When you do this to get an equivalent fraction, you find a different way to express the same amount of  pie.
These are both the same amount of pie to eat.
But we still don’t know how to add up two fractions with different denominators.
Use the lowest common denominator for addition What we’re looking for is a common denominator for both fractions.
To keep the math simple, it should be the lowest common denominator.
Once you’ve done that, then you can figure out how to find the equivalent fractions of  each addend with the right denominator.
These are the multiples that the denominators have in common.
When you’re presented with two fractions, and you want the lowest common denominator, just list the multiples for each number and choose the smallest one that they share.
Since we’ve found 12 is our least common multiple, now we can use it as the lowest common denominator.
Least common multiple (LCM) - The lowest multiple that numbers have in common.
Fraction addition and subtraction training Still feel like you can’t add fractions? You’re closer than you think—you just need to put it all together.
Find the lowest common denominator (LCD) and multiply by 1 to get a common denominator.
If  you have a word problem, make sure that you know what you’re working with by writing it out first.
Take the denominators you’re working with and find the LCD, just like we did earlier.
Determine what version of  1 to use to get both fractions with the LCD.
You know what denominator you need to get to (12)
Now you have to figure out what fractional form of  1 to use to get there.
Both of these fractions need to be converted to 12ths.
Replace the fractions from the original problem with their equivalent ones and then add them to find out the solution.
Use your new skills converting fractions to common denominators to add and subtract the fractions.
Use your new skills converting fractions to common denominators to add and subtract the fractions.
We had to go out a ways to find a common denominator.
Since this fraction is already in the LCD, you can multiply by one.
Dividing by one doesn’t change the value Dividing by one doesn’t change anything either, which means that you can divide a fraction by one (in any of  its many forms) without changing the size of  the piece of  pie that you have.
All of  this is just another way to express the identity of  one.
Now the question is how do you figure out what to divide by?
I do not want to be finding LCD’s that big.
We know how to find an equivalent fraction with a larger denominator—what about a smaller one?
It happens pretty often that you get into a situation where your LCD is still pretty big, and then your answer is this big fraction.
When that happens, you just need to divide by one in a way that gets you a smaller, more user friendly, but still equivalent, fraction.
Multiplicative Identity Property of One - Any number multiplied or divided by one is itself.
You can do this division as many times as you want to, so to get started, you just need to find a common factor for both numbers—any one will do.
That’s better, but if there’s another common factor, you need to pull it out too - that way the fraction will be completely reduced.
To completely reduce a fraction, you need to remove all of  the common factors from the fraction.
That means you keep trying to divide out numbers until they’re aren’t any more in common.
Ok, so that’s it! 23 is prime, so there aren’t any more factors left.
You can’t stop reducing the fraction until there aren’t any more common factors.
That means that either the numerator or the denominator must be prime, or there aren’t any more factors in common.
Factor trees can eliminate lots of little steps There’s an easy way to come up with factors of  a number; it’s called a factor tree.
A factor tree is a table that lists all of  the factors, so it’s easier to come up with your factor list and then reduce your fractions.
If  it’s an even number, 2 is the way to go.
You can usually come up with the other number off  the top of  your head.
Stop the branch of the tree if all that’s left is one and the number itself.
Everybody knows that 1 goes into everything, so don’t bother.
Divide your new number by two if it’s a factor.
Pick out the prime factors You may not know how to read it yet, but you now have a list of  all of  the factors that make up your number.
The form of  the tree tells you one important thing, too.
The end of  each of  the branches are the prime factors of  the number.
If  you list all of  the prime factors, it’s called prime factorization, and those are the smallest pieces that can be multiplied together to get your big number.
Not only that, but multiplying them in different combinations will give you all of  the factors of  the numbers.
In this form, you can use the list of factors as a check list to figure out all of the factors.
Reduce fractions with the factor tree Now that you know how to use the factor tree, you can reduce fractions quickly.
Lots of  times, the fraction will be in an equation, so it helps to pull it to the side where you have some room.
Find out the prime factorization of  the numerator and the denominator.
If  you multiply the prime factorization out, you get the original number.
This really isn’t changing the value of  anything, just how it’s written.
Every factor that’s in both the numerator and denominator can be removed.
If  there are factors left that need to be combined again, do that before you write the final fraction.
Q: What’s the GCF? I’ve heard it before, but I’m not sure what it’s used for.
That is the largest number that can be pulled out of two larger numbers.
Q: I’ve heard of using the GCF for reducing fractions.
A: The GCF is actually used in much the same way for reducing fractions as the LCM is used for coming up with the LCD.
If you can list the factors that go into both your numerator and denominator, it’s easy to find the biggest one.
Once you do that, you can simply divide the numerator and denominator by the GCF.
The problem is, it’s tricky to come up with the factor list.
The factor tree and the prime factorization always work the first time.
Q: What’s the difference between the LCD and the LCM?
A: The LCM (lowest common multiple) is a numeric property of any two numbers.
You use the LCM of two numbers as the LCD (least common denominator)
Q: Working with fractions seems to be much harder than working with decimals.
A: Getting started with fractions is a bit trickier than starting with decimals.
The thing is, once you get the hang of it, fractions can actually be faster and easier because they tend to stay neater than decimals.
Think about it, working with non-terminating, non-repeating decimals would not be pretty.
A: Sometimes you’ll want to do it just to make the fractions easier to deal with.
Working with large denominators gets pretty ugly if you need to come up with a LCD and add or subtract.
Other times, your problem will ask you to reduce the fraction, or you will get an answer that just doesn’t make much sense if it’s not reduced.
Q: Why is it called a factor tree? A: Not really sure, but did you ever think that they kinda look like evergreen trees?
Q: What if I can do the factorization in my head? Do I still need to do the factor tree?
A: Nope, you can skip it (but the tree tends to keep you from messing up)
Q: Apparently dividing by one and multiplying by one are both important?
Working with the identity property of one makes all of this fraction manipulation possible.
Getting started with fractions is trickier than decimals, but it’s easier in the end.
To multiply fractions, just multiply the numerators together to get the new numerator; multiply the denominators to get the new denominator.
So multiply the first numerator by the second denominator to get the numerator solution.
Then multiply the first denominator by the second numerator to get the solution for the denominator.
To add fractions, you first need to make sure the fractions have a common denominator.
After that, just add the numerators and keep the common denominator.
To subtract fractions, you first need to make sure the fractions have a common denominator.
After that, just subtract the numerators and keep the common denominator.
Whatever is left over as the remainder is the numerator for the final fraction.
To reduce fractions, divide both the numerator and the denominator by the same factor until they have no factors left in common.
Work through the different type of fraction problems, and reduce all of your answers!
For this operation, you can add up the whole numbers, and then the fractions.
Work through the different type of fraction problems, and reduce all of your answers!
For this operation, you can add up the whole numbers, and then the fractions.
The fraction needs to be moved to a proper fraction.
You can do the division to reduce this fraction, but since it’s so close the denominator, you can see that it’s just one and one left over.
For this operation, you need to convert the first fraction to an improper, then subtract.
This fraction needs to be converted to a proper fraction.
Is there a way to just convert them to decimals? Then I can just deal with them that way.
Now that you have the skills to reduce fractions and change their denominators, you’re ready to find out how to convert decimals to fractions and back again.
And since decimals and percentages are pretty much the same thing, you can convert to percentages, too.
Converting from a fraction to a decimal is actually very simple.
We know from converting improper fractions that the line in the middle of  the fraction just means division.
We also know, from decimal division, that you can add as many zeros as you need after the decimal to finish the division.
If  you put those together, you can convert fractions to decimals.
Converting decimals to fractions The key to converting decimals to fractions is the decimal places themselves.
Remember that 0.1 is one tenth? As in, one over ten.
So, to convert a decimal, just drop the decimal, put the numerals of  the decimal in the numerator, and then put a one and the number of  zeros for the decimal (like, 1000 for thousandths) in the denominator.
When it just says “reduce,” assume it means as much as possible.
Conversions everywhere Just to sum up—you also know how to get from the decimal to a percentage and back again.
This means that which form you use to do any given problem is really up to you.
Different forms are good for different things, and you’ll learn that through experience.
Do the division Move the decimal 2 places to the right and add the %
Move the decimal 2 places to the left and drop the %
Division by Zero doesn’t work There’s a special case with division: division by zero doesn’t work (and since fractions are just division, it’s a fraction problem, too)
To understand division by zero, it’s best to start off  with division by a few numbers close to zero.
If  you move to smaller and smaller numbers, a disturbing trend starts appear.
The closer you get to dividing by zero, the bigger the answer gets.
Sometimes multiplication takes forever! What if  you wanted to write out an expansion of  multiplying the same number over and over again? Say you send a chain letter to two people, who then also send it to two people.
How many people would get it by the third day?
Those people send it to two each (again, so then times 2)
This is how many people get it on the third day.
Seems like there should be an easier way to write this thing out.
It’s pretty easy to mess up how many 2’s get written, and you’re just writing the same thing over and over again.
An exponent is a notation above a number that means.
If  we rewrite the equation we wrote before with an exponent, it would look like this:
This is the exponent, 3.This number is called the “base.” It’s the number that gets multiplied.
We’ve figured out what happens to the chain letter on the third day.
We know that each person who gets the letter will send it on to two people—that won’t change.
What does change is how many days have passed, which is the exponent.
Since each person sends the letter to two other people, our base is two.
Each day is basically how many 2’s we have—that’s our exponent.
Exponent - A superscript notation that indicates multiplication of the base that many times.
Make sure to write out the whole expanded expression first.
You’re probably going to need a calculator for some of these.
Just because this is a fraction, don’t worry - just write it out like you do for whole numbers.
Negative numbers don’t change anything either, just write them out and think about it!
Then fold it in half  again, and now it’s four sheets thick.
Why does all this matter? Now you’re ready to tackle Algebra.
Jack and Kate duke it out over math to get to Australia.
Help Jo find out all about gaming system and how to pay for them.
Make sure to write out the whole expanded expression first.
You’re probably going to need a calculator for some of these.
Just another expression of the identity property of one = one to any exponent is still one.
With integer multiplication, an odd number of negatives keeps it negative.
