Head First Excel is awesome! Like other Head First books, it’s a very approachable mix of  knowledge, business situations, and humor.
Not only do you learn all you need to know about Excel, but you also get to learn some real business lingo and smarts as well.
Need to create formulas? Need to make reports, charts, or pivot tables? This is the book for you.
Head First Excel shows how to fully utilize some of  the best features Excel has to offer to improve productivity and data analysis skills.
Do you use Excel to keep lists and calculate the occasional budget? Would you like to dive deeper and learn how Excel can give you an edge in your daily workflow? Unlock your Excel superpowers with Michael Milton’s Head First Excel.
You’ll learn to create data visualizations and design spreadsheets that make your point and get you noticed.
Discover how to easily audit complex formulas written by others, so you can quickly validate (or call ‘B.S.’ on) their calculations.
Build models that optimize your business and/or finances based on all possible scenarios.
Kathy and Bert’s Head First Java transforms the printed page into the closest thing to a GUI you’ve ever seen.
Just the right tone for the geeked-out, casual-cool guru coder in all of  us.
There are books you buy, books you keep, books you keep on your desk, and thanks to O’Reilly and the Head First crew, there is the penultimate category, Head First books.
They’re the ones that are dog-eared, mangled, and carried everywhere.
Head First SQL is at the top of  my stack.
Usually when reading through a book or article on design patterns, I’d have to occasionally stick myself in the eye with something just to make sure I was paying attention.
Odd as it may sound, this book makes learning about design patterns fun.
Wouldn’t it be dreamy if there was a book on Excel that.
O’Reilly Media books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Many of  the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks.
Where those designations appear in this book, and O’Reilly Media, Inc., was aware of  a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in caps or initial caps.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of  this book, the publisher and the author assume no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of  the information contained herein.
When Michael Milton’s friends were programming in BASIC and playing Leisure Suit Larry back in the 80s, he was creating charts in SuperCalc.
His career has consisted mainly of  helping people out by showing up with the right spreadsheet at the right moment, and he hopes that after reading Head First Excel, you’ll have the same experience.
Here you are trying to learn something, while here your brain is doing you a favor by making sure the learning doesn’t stick.
Here’s what YOU can do to bend your brain into submission xxxi.
And when it comes to lists, Excel does a great job.
Excel, especially in its more recent versions, has become quite handy as a page layout.
You’re about to get comfortable with some important and not-so-obvious Excel.
No matter how creative and brilliant your formula is, it won’t do you much good.
How each would look if you copied and pasted to C2
But only if you know how to look at them.
Sometimes, Excel will show you a number but think of it as text.
The simple truth is that dates and times are a.
Over many years and many versions, the program has accumulated specialized.
But what is a problem for you is the group of.
And that is the point, right? If all you wanted to do was simple calculation, you’d be fine.
But those complicated formulas can get unwieldyespecially ones written by other people, which can be almost impossible to decipher.
Excel has extensive charting facilities, and if you just know where to click, you’ll.
Excel loves your numbers, but it can also handle your text.
It contains a suite of functions designed to enable you to manipulate text data.
There are many applications to these functions, but one that all data people must.
Text functions shine at letting you pull elements out of messy data so.
FIND(“x”, “Head First Excel”) H e a d  F i r s t  E x c e l.
But what are they? And why should we care? For Excel newbies, pivot tables can.
They’re called Boolean values, and they’re just plain ol’ TRUE and FALSE.
Boolean values into logical formulas to do a variety of tasks, from cleaning up.
You’ve developed a formidable knowledge of Excel in the past 13 chapters, and by.
But what if your problems don’t fit those tools? What if you don’t even have the.
But Excel is a complicated program, and there’s so much left to learn.
Some of the best features of Excel aren’t installed by default.
That’s right, in order to run the optimization from Chapter 10, you need to activate the.
Solver, an add-in that is included in Excel by default but not activated without your.
I can’t believe they put that in an Excel book.
Do you prefer stimulating dinner party conversation to dry, dull, academic lectures?
Do you have basic software skills like opening and closing files, and copying and pasting text?
Are you looking to do higher-level programming in Excel with macros and Visual Basic for Applications?
Have you never used Excel at all, or used it a little but never done anything powerful with it?
Have you already learned most of Excel’s functions but need a solid reference?
Are you afraid to try something different? Would you rather have a root canal than mix stripes with plaid? Do you believe that a technical book can’t be serious if it anthropomorphizes Boolean functions and pivot tables?
It was built that way, and it helps you stay alive.
So what does your brain do with all the routine, ordinary, normal things you encounter? Everything it can to stop them from interfering with the brain’s real job—recording things that matter.
It doesn’t bother saving the boring things; they never make it past the “this is obviously not important” filter.
How does your brain know what’s important? Suppose you’re out for a day hike and a tiger jumps in front of  you, what happens inside your head and body?
Or trying to learn some tough technical topic your boss thinks will take a week, 10 days at the most.
It’s trying to make sure that this obviously non-important content doesn’t clutter up scarce resources.
Resources that are better spent storing the really big things.
Like how you should never have posted those “party” photos on your Facebook page.
And there’s no simple way to tell your brain, “Hey brain, thank you very much, but no matter how dull this book is, and how little I’m registering on the emotional Richter scale right now, I really do want you to keep this stuff  around.”
We think of a “Head First” r eader as a learner.
If  you really want to learn, and you want to learn more quickly and more deeply, pay attention to how you pay attention.
Most of  us did not take courses on metacognition or learning theory when we were growing up.
We were expected to learn, but rarely taught to learn.
But we assume that if  you’re holding this book, you really want to learn about Excel.
And you probably don’t want to spend a lot of  time.
If  you want to use what you read in this book, you need to remember what you read.
To get the most from this book, or any book or learning experience, take responsibility for your brain.
The trick is to get your brain to see the new material you’re learning as Really Important.
Otherwise, you’re in for a constant battle, with your brain doing its best to keep the new content from sticking.
So just how DO you get your brain to treat Excel like it was a hungry tiger?
There’s the slow, tedious way, or the faster, more effective way.
You obviously know that you are able to learn and remember even the dullest of  topics if  you keep pounding the same thing into your brain.
With enough repetition, your brain says, “This doesn’t feel important to him, but he keeps looking at the same thing over and over and over, so I suppose it must be.”
The faster way is to do anything that increases brain activity, especially different types of  brain activity.
The things on the previous page are a big part of  the solution, and they’re all things that have been proven to help your brain work in your favor.
For example, studies show that putting words within the pictures they describe (as opposed to somewhere else on the page, like a caption or in the body text) causes your brain to try to make sense of  how the words and picture relate, and this causes more neurons to fire.
More neurons firing = more chances for your brain to get that this is something worth paying attention to, and possibly recording.
A conversational style helps because people tend to pay more attention when they perceive that they’re in a conversation, since they’re expected to follow along and hold up their end.
The amazing thing is, your brain doesn’t necessarily care that the “conversation” is between you and a book! On the other hand, if  the writing style is formal and dry, your brain perceives it the same way you experience being lectured to while sitting in a roomful of  passive attendees.
Here’s what WE did: We used pictures, because your brain is tuned for visuals, not text.
As far as your brain’s concerned, a picture really is worth a thousand words.
And when text and pictures work together, we embedded the text in the pictures because your brain works more effectively when the text is within the thing the text refers to, as opposed to in a caption or buried in the text somewhere.
We used redundancy, saying the same thing in different ways and with different media types, and multiple senses, to increase the chance that the content gets coded into more than one area of  your brain.
We used concepts and pictures in unexpected ways because your brain is tuned for novelty, and we used pictures and ideas with at least some emotional content, because your brain is tuned to pay attention to the biochemistry of  emotions.
That which causes you to feel something is more likely to be remembered, even if  that feeling is nothing more than a little humor, surprise, or interest.
We used a personalized, conversational style, because your brain is tuned to pay more attention when it believes you’re in a conversation than if  it thinks you’re passively listening to a presentation.
We included more than 80 activities, because your brain is tuned to learn and remember more when you do things than when you read about things.
We used multiple learning styles, because you might prefer step-by-step procedures, while someone else wants to understand the big picture first, and someone else just wants to see an example.
But regardless of  your own learning preference, everyone benefits from seeing the same content represented in multiple ways.
We include content for both sides of  your brain, because the more of  your brain you engage, the more likely you are to learn and remember, and the longer you can stay focused.
Since working one side of  the brain often means giving the other side a chance to rest, you can be more productive at learning for a longer period of  time.
And we included stories and exercises that present more than one point of  view, because your brain is tuned to learn more deeply when it’s forced to make evaluations and judgments.
We included challenges, with exercises, and by asking questions that don’t always have a straight answer, because your brain is tuned to learn and remember when it has to work at something.
Think about it—you can’t get your body in shape just by watching people at the gym.
But we did our best to make sure that when you’re working hard, it’s on the right things.
That you’re not spending one extra dendrite processing a hard-to-understand example, or parsing difficult, jargon-laden, or overly terse text.
In stories, examples, pictures, etc., because, well, because you’re a person.
And your brain pays more attention to people than it does to things.
These tips are a starting point; listen to your brain and figure out what works for you and what doesn’t.
Your brain works best in a nice bath of  fluid.
Dehydration (which can happen before you ever feel thirsty) decreases cognitive function.
There’s only one way to learn about Excel: get your hands dirty.
And that’s what you’re going to do throughout this book.
Excel is a skill, and the only way to get good at it is to practice.
We’re going to give you a lot of  practice: every chapter has exercises that pose a problem for you to solve.
Don’t just skip over them—a lot of  the learning happens when you solve the exercises.
But try to solve the problem before you look at the solution.
And definitely get it working before you move on to the next part of  the book.
Groaning over a bad joke is still better than feeling nothing at all.
If  you find yourself  starting to skim the surface or forget what you just read, it’s time for a break.
Once you go past a certain point, you won’t learn faster by trying to shove more in, and you might even hurt the process.
If you’re trying to understand something, or increase your chance of  remembering it later, say it out loud.
Better still, try to explain it out loud to someone else.
You’ll learn more quickly, and you might uncover ideas you hadn’t known were there when you were reading about it.
Part of  the learning (especially the transfer to long-term memory) happens after you put the book down.
Your brain needs time on its own, to do more processing.
If  you put in something new during that processing time, some of  what you just learned will be lost.
They’re not optional sidebars, they’re part of  the core content! Don’t skip them.
Here’s what YOU can do to bend your brain into submission.
We put them in, but if  we did them for you, that would be like having someone else do your workouts for you.
There’s plenty of  evidence that physical activity while learning can increase the learning.
When the book asks you a question, don’t just skip to the answer.
The more deeply you force your brain to think, the better chance you have of  learning and remembering.
The more you understand, the less you have to memorize.
Read Me This is a learning experience, not a reference book.
We deliberately stripped out everything that might get in the way of  learning whatever it is we’re working on at that point in the book.
And the first time through, you need to begin at the beginning, because the book makes assumptions about what you’ve already seen and learned.
A lot of  books on Excel are little more than fancy restatements of  the Help files that give as much weight to formulas as they do to all of  Excel’s other features.
The thing is, the people who are the most skillful users of  Excel are the ones who really, really know formulas.
So this book was written to have you constantly using and learning new functions to make your formulas powerful.
This book uses Excel 2007 for Windows, but you can use other versions of Excel.
Excel 2007 for Windows was notable for its major user interface redesign, but it also included features like structured references that are really useful.
So useful, in fact, that some of  those features made it into Head First Excel, even though not everyone has upgraded yet.
But even if  you haven’t upgraded, don’t sweat it: you can just skip over those sections and not have too much trouble, because…
Most of the important stuff you need to know about Excel has been in the software for years.
So don’t sweat it if  you’re not ready to drop the cash to upgrade (although you should eventually)
It’ll all get ironed out in future versions of  Excel for Mac, we’re sure!
You can download data in both .xlsx and .xls format.
In this book there are a lot of  situations where you’ll need to download data in order to do the exercise.
Suppose you’re using an early version of  Excel that doesn’t read the newer .xlsx file format that’s used most frequently in Head First Excel.
It’s no problem: just download the file using the .xls extension.
Both versions of  the files are on the O’Reilly website, but remember that a lot of  the newer Excel features will be absent from the .xls versions.
The exercises and activities are not add-ons; they’re part of  the core content of  the book.
Some of  them are to help with memory, some are for understanding, and some will help you apply what you’ve learned.
The crossword puzzles are the only thing you don’t have to do, but they’re good for giving your brain a chance to think about the words and terms you’ve been learning in a different context.
One distinct difference in a Head First book is that we want you to really get it.
And we want you to finish the book remembering what you’ve learned.
Most reference books don’t have retention and recall as a goal, but this book is about learning, so you’ll see some of  the same concepts come up more than once.
We love it when you can find fun and useful extra stuff  on book companion sites.
You’ll find extra stuff  on networking at the following URL: http://www.headfirstlabs.com/books/hfexcel/
For some of  them, there is no right answer, and for others, part of  the learning experience of  the Brain Power activities is for you to decide if  and when your answers are right.
In some of  the Brain Power exercises, you will find hints to point you in the right direction.
Bill Mietelski is a software engineer and a three-time Head First technical reviewer.
He can’t wait to run a data analysis on his golf  stats to help him win on the links.
Anthony Rose has been working in the data analysis field for nearly 10 years and is currently the president of Support Analytics, a data analysis and visualization consultancy.
Anthony has an MBA concentrated in management and a finance degree, which is where his passion for data and analysis started.
When he isn’t working, he can normally be found on the golf  course in Columbia, Maryland, lost in a good book, savoring a delightful wine, or simply enjoying time with his young girls and amazing wife.
Ken Bluttman is the author of  over a dozen computer and other nonfiction titles.
Brian Sawyer edited Head First Excel and is a creative, generous, and fun guy to work with.
This book and Head First Data Analysis benefited immeasurably from his input and guidance.
Brett McLaughlin’s vision and input have left an indelible mark on the Head First series and on my writing.
Karen Shaner provided logistical support for this book, most of  which was invisible to me but all of  which is greatly appreciated.
I am very grateful that this book has the endorsement of  these supportive experts.
A very special thank you goes to my father, also known as Michael Milton, who introduced me to spreadsheets.
He and I have passed spreadsheets back and forth over the years and have enjoyed learning Excel together.
Head First books and has listened to more speeches about data analysis than any spouse should have to.
Also indispensable has been the support of  the rest of  my family, Elizabeth, Sara, Gary, and Marie.
With a subscription, you can read any page and watch any video from our library online.
Access new titles before they are available for print, and get exclusive access to manuscripts in development and post feedback for the authors.
Copy and paste code samples, organize your favorites, download chapters, bookmark key sections, create notes, print out pages, and benefit from tons of  other time-saving features.
To have full digital access to this book and others on similar topics from O’Reilly and other publishers, sign up for free at http://my.safaribooksonline.com/?portal=oreilly.
As soon as I get out of here, I’m totally going to get a computer to solve this sort of problem.
And when it comes to lists, Excel does a great job.
Can you li ve it up on the last night of your vacat ion? It’s your last night in New York City on a vacation you’ve taken with your friends Bob and Sasha.
You’ve had a great time and really enjoyed the city.
But you’ve also spent plenty of  money, and now the three of  you want to see if  you have enough left to go to a nice restaurant on your last night.
Finances? I hope one of you has been keeping track.
This is how much you decided you wanted to spend on food.
You’ve been handling expenses by having only one of  you pay at a time.
Instead of splitting up every check at every restaurant, you all figured you’d settle up later.
Now you need to settle up and decide whether you have any more money left in your budget for a big meal.
What approach would you take to splitting up your expenses?1
What approach would you take to splitting up your expenses?1
Why not try using Excel? You could do it with paper or in an email, but since you.
You could go through each check and try to split them all up, but that would be.
An easier approach would be just to divide everyone’s bill by three.
That way you have a good estimate of each person’s share of each bill.
People often use Excel to keep permanent records of  their data.
The program is a great way to take a snapshot of  your data and thinking at a certain point in time.
With your budgeting calculations set up in an Excel spreadsheet, you’ll be able to show your friends exactly how you came to your conclusions about how you should split up the expenses.
You can keep track of this sort of stuff forever using Excel spreadsheets.
You never know when you’ll need to go back and check your stats.
Formulas work with your data To add up and divide what you spent, you use formulas.
Say you want to add together the totals from the two bills on the right.
Open Excel and write the formula that adds up the total you all spent together.
Excel has a large variety of  formulas you can use to make calculations, from basic addition to highly specialized engineering and statistical tools.
Be sure to watch what happens here in the formula bar.
You just typed a formula to calculate how much you and your friends spent in total.
You aren’t limited to adding two numbers; you can add as many numbers as you like.
Now you just need to split up the grand total among the three of you.
And that means dividing the $689 total you spent by three.
When you type the formula, you can see the output both inside this cell and inside the formula bar.
When you press Return, cell A1 shows the calculated answer...
Write the formula to split up the total you spent ($689) among the three of you.
Match each operation on the left with the formulas that implement the operation on the right.
You wrote a formula to calculate $689 split three ways.
Match each operation on the left with the formulas that implement the operation on the right.
Yes! My budget was $400, so it looks like I spent only a little over half.
I left a receipt in the bottom of one of my shopping bags.
It looked like we had everything figured out, but now that he left out something from his total, we’re going to have to go back and fix our numbers.
Maybe he’s right: instead of  getting totals from Bob and Sasha, we should just take a look at all the receipts.
The total you find might be more accurate that way.
On the other hand, that could be even more work.…
We have to rerun the calculations? What a pain! That means if we get more data we have to go digging into a bunch of formulas.
Combined with your own receipts, the final list looks like this.
Here is the total amount you all spent on each meal.
References keep your formulas working even if your data changes You don’t have to write your formula like this:
This formula is hard to read, and even more importantly, it’s hard to change if  a data point turns out to be wrong.
Instead of  writing a long string of  numbers like this, you can use references.
References are a shorthand that Excel uses to look for values.
The reference for the value of the first bill is B2
Write the formula that adds your bills together using references.
Then write a formula to split that value three ways.
Write a formula to determine whether you are still under budget and, if so, by how much.
Then write a formula to split that value three ways.
Write the formula that adds your bills together using references.
This expression calculates the corrected total amount you spent, which is $739
Did you notice how the colors in your references conveniently match the colors in column B?
Be sure to create text labels for your formulas, so you know what they mean when you look at them later!
This formula takes the value you just calculated and divides it by three.
Write a formula to determine whether you are still under budget and, if so, by how much.
Your actual references might be different, depending on where you decided to put your formulas.
Sasha came up with her own formula, but when she ran it she got a different answer from yours.
How is Sasha’s formula different from your formulas? Why do you think she got a different answer?
I’m trying to learn a little Excel myself, so I’ve been running the numbers along with you.
Sasha wrote a different formula from you and came up with a different answer.
Check your formulas carefully One really important skill for Excel users is the ability to go back and look carefully at formulas that have been already written.
Formulas might look complex and long, but that doesn’t mean that they’re correct.
Be patient when you look at formulas and pay close attention to their references.
Hers is different because, instead of separating the operations into formulas, she tried to add the.
That formula may be right, but it’s still really long.
Your result might also be $246.33, depending on your number format.
Refer to a bunch of ce l ls using a range.
Use SUM to add the e lements in a range.
You can point to a list of  references in Excel using a range.
A range is simply two references with a colon between them, and the colon tells Excel to look at every cell in between those two references.
For example, say you want your formula to do something to this list of  references.
In order to make your ranges work, you need to pass them to formulas that know what to do with them.
You can use the SUM function to add together all the cells in your range.*
Most functions consist of  a word followed by parentheses that contain one or more arguments.
They often need arguments in order to know where to look to get the data they need to evaluate.
Here are a bunch of cell references you want to evaluate.
Inside your spreadsheet, rewrite the formula that calculates each person’s share using a range and the SUM function.
This SUM formula adds together all the cells in the range B2:B10
A formula’s arguments are the ranges or values you put between the parentheses.
SUM(B2:B10)/3 This formula is much easier to read and understand.
You could add together thousands of numbers using SUM and ranges!
Excel evaluates the SUM function first and then divides it by three.
Your answer is the same as it was when you added together the references individually...
Here’s the formula that adds the bills together and divides them by three.
Bob and Sasha wonder whether we’ve been taking the r ight approach...
Since we really do want to be fair, shouldn’t we.
But splitting the checks evenly three ways is certainly an easier calculation.
I wouldn’t be able to crunch those numbers in Excel.
But then again it appears we have some sort of spreadsheet whiz as a travelling companion.
Maybe they can work some magic and sort everything out as precisely as you want.
The Bobster How would you go about splitting up all the bills?
Your fr iends agree: split the checks indiv idually Since you’re going to the trouble to create a spreadsheet for your dining expenses, you might as well go ahead and break each check down individually.
Here are the receipts for the meals you bought yourself.
Here is a spreadsheet to help you split up the expenses for the restaurant bills you paid for.
Fill in the blanks for Bob and Sasha using the values on the facing page.
Now, write a formula to calculate your share of  meal #1
Instead of adding elements from the facing page, just subtract what Bob and Sasha spent from the total.
First, sum only the amounts for each meal for Bob and Sasha.
You just calculated the breakdown for each bill you paid.
Fill in the blanks for Bob and Sasha using the values on the facing page.
Now, write a formula to calculate your share of  meal #1
Instead of adding elements from the facing page, just subtract what Bob and Sasha spent from the total.
This is the value for the tip, which needs to be split into three.
Here’s one of the formulas you just wrote, which is for Bob’s bill at Tom’s Restaurant.
When you copied and pasted the formula, Excel updated the references for each position.
When you copy and paste a formula, the references shif t This feature of  formulas is really useful because you can write just one formula to do a whole lot of  different stuff.
So how are we going to figure out who owes what to whom?
It actually would not have taken you long to write three more similar formulas to calculate your share of  the meals you bought.
But what if, instead of  four meals, you’d bought a hundred or a thousand meals? In that case, being able to copy formulas with automatic reference shifting would be a big help.
Below these three tables on your spreadsheet, write the formulas to answer these questions.
Be sure to put text labels in the cells next to each formula to remind you what they mean.
Write the formula that shows what you spent on Bob.1
Write the formula that shows what Bob spent on you.2
Using the above two formulas, write a formula that shows what Bob owes you.
Now how are you doing relative to your budget of  $400?6
The parentheses mean that this is a negative number, which means that Bob actually owes Sasha.
Below these three tables on your spreadsheet, write the formulas to answer these questions.
Be sure to put text labels in the cells next to each formula to remind you what they mean.
Write the formula that shows what you spent on Bob.1
Write the formula that shows what Bob spent on you.2
Using the above two formulas, write a formula that shows what Bob owes you.
Now how are you doing relative to your budget of  $400?66
This formula just subtracts what Bob spent on you from what you spent on Bob.
These groups of formulas go through the same motions with different combinations of people.
Alternatively, you can place commas between ranges for a more concise SUM formula.
Excel formulas le t you dril l deep into your data You can use spreadsheets as a hugely powerful tool with formulas.
You might want to run a simple calculation, or you might need to build a really elaborate system of  formulas to help you find the answers you need.
No matter which approach you choose to take, Excel is ready with the formulas you need to get the job done.
Here you added together the costs of the meals individually.
In this spreadsheet you broke everything down to a really fine level.
Your friends loved your spreadsheet and used it to figure out how they are doing relative to their own budgets.
With $197 burning a hole in your pocket, you are ready for a crazy night out with your friends in one of  the most exciting cities in the world!
Everyone has plenty of cash lef t for a food-f il led night in New York City!
You’re going to have to wheel me out of this restaurant in a few hours....
You know, Excel has some pretty solid formatting tools built in!
A lot of formula-writing masters, who are familiar with just how powerful Excel can be, are.
You’re about to get comfortable with some important and not-so-obvious Excel tools for.
The calculations work, but the spreadsheet just doesn’t have the look.
CRMFreak needs to present the ir f inancials to analysts Because CRMFreak is a publicly traded company and is heavily influenced by what Wall Street analysts have to say about them, it’s really important that they do a good job with their public financial statements.
The CEO needs you to format CRMFreak’s income statement, using your Excel skills to make the formulas work correctly and provide an elegant presentation.
Write a formula to calculate Total revenue (cell B7), adding together the elements in the Revenue section.
Write a formula to calculate the Total cost of revenues (cell B12), adding together the elements in the Cost of  revenues section.
Write a formula to calculate the Gross profit (cell B14), subtracting the Total cost of revenues from the Total revenue.
Write a formula to calculate the Total expenses (cell B20), adding together the elements in the Expenses section.
Finally, write a formula to calculate the Net income (cell B22), subtracting the Gross profit from the Total expenses.
You just wrote a bunch of formulas to calculate CRMFreak’s net income.
Write a formula to calculate Total revenue (cell B7), adding together the elements in the Revenue section.
Write a formula to calculate the Total cost of revenues (cell B12), adding together the elements in the Cost of  revenues section.
Write a formula to calculate the Gross profit (cell B14), subtracting the Total cost of revenues from the Total revenue.
Write a formula to calculate the Total expenses (cell B20), adding together the elements in the Expenses section.
Finally, write a formula to calculate the Net income (cell B22), subtracting the Gross profit from the Total expenses.
So they should have dollar signs in front of  them to let people know what they mean.
The numbers in the income statement need to have dollar signs.
Add a dollar sign in front of  the formula you created in B7
What happened when you tried to add the $ symbol to some values and formula?
Better click Undo three times so we can try all this again.
Add a dollar sign in front of  the formula you created in B7
This formula doesn’t appear to be calculating a return value any more.
Your data is different from its formatting, and typing dollar signs in front of  numbers is just one way of  telling Excel to apply currency formatting to your data.
On the other hand, when you tried to type a dollar sign into the formula in cell B7, Excel didn’t understand that you wanted to apply currency formatting.
Excel thought you were changing the formula to plain text, which is why the formula stopped working.
In order to change a formula from general formatting to currency formatting, you need to do something different from typing the dollar sign into the cell itself.
How would you go about applying currency formatting to your cells, aside from typing dollar signs into the cells themselves?
You can format your numbers in a bunch of different ways.
No matter what formatting you use, Excel sees the underlying data the same.
How to format your data In order to format your cells the way you want, select those cells and then choose formatting options on the Home tab of  the Ribbon.
Q: So the formulas you write completely ignore the formatting choices you make?
Excel does try to figure out how to format your formula’s cells by looking at the arguments in your function.
If, for example, you wanted to use the SUM function to add a bunch of numbers that were already formatted as currency, Excel would automatically apply that formatting to the cell where you put your formula.
Q: What if I wanted to use SUM to add a number that was formatted as currency with a number that didn’t have any formatting?
A: In that case, Excel would have no way of knowing what the calculation meant and would have the formula output display without any formatting.
It’s like Excel has different rules for formatting things automatically depending on the context.
A: You could say that, but what’s important is that you take control of your spreadsheet’s formatting early.
When Excel’s automatic formatting works for you automatically, that’s great, but it’s important to remember that formatting is a design choice you make to create a more readable and useful spreadsheet.
These buttons change the alignment of values inside your cells.
Tip: Double-click on one of these tabs to hide the Ribbon for more screen space.
Using the buttons on the Ribbon, make all the cells in column B have currency formatting.
Select all the cells in column B by clicking the letter B here.
Then, click the buttons to apply the formatting attributes you want to use.
Don’t forget you can click Undo if you make a mistake.
Were you able to apply currency formatting to the values in column B?
Then, you pressed this button twice to remove the zeros after the decimal place.
That spreadsheet is hideous! It appears that he wrecked your work, visually speaking.
Worst of  all, gaudy design undermines your credibility with your audience.
You need some serious design principles to guide you away from a mess like this....
The boss approves! Great job! I made a few formatting tweaks of my own, and now we’re ready to go!
Design principle: keep it simple The analysts who are trying to assess the health of CRMFreak are not interested in being dazzled.
What they want to do is to be able to make the best decisions about CRMFreak’s data as they can.
Which of  these spreadsheets do you think will do the best job of  facilitating that sort of  thinking?
The spreadsheet on the right has excessive formatting that gets in the way of  your ability to understand the data.
The spreadsheet on the left is very simple, but perfectly clear.
Jim: No, no, no! You have to have colors in a spreadsheet like that.
Maybe the boss didn’t get it exactly right, but people expect something more than the plain Jane stuff  that has no formatting.
When someone is looking at a spreadsheet, they need to have the utmost concentration and never be seduced by silly formatting.
Frank: Guys, isn’t there a middle ground here? Maybe a little formatting can help, but one should take it easy and not go overboard?
I know that when I use spreadsheets, I need to use colors and fonts and boxes to help me keep track of  what I’m looking at.
Using color is part of  the way I think about data.
You just think you’re using the colors to help you think about data.
If  you knew better you’d see that numbers have no color.
If  Jim wants to use colors to help him think through his spreadsheet, that’s totally fine.
Joe: There is no reason Jim should torment us with his “colorful” ideas.
Just because you feel the need to highlight a bunch of  stuff  on your spreadsheets, Jim, doesn’t mean that you should assume that everyone else thinks that way, too.
Frank: Well maybe if  we find a way to use fonts and colors with taste and restraint we can get a result that all of  us can appreciate.…
How do you use fonts and colors with taste and restraint?
Use fonts to draw the eye to what is most important The font panel is the first place many people look to set the formatting for their document.
When you work with these tools, be sure to remember to use them only to the extent that they help your readers organize their thinking about the data.
Anything more than that runs the risk of  distracting them from the main event: the data.
Click these buttons to make the text bold and italic.
Click the paint bucket to fill the cell with color.
Using one or more of the elements on the left, change your spreadsheet’s formatting to draw the eye to key elements.
Select cells and use these design elements to draw the eye to what’s most important.
You just applied some formatting to your CRMFreak income statement.
This title is a little larger than the rest of the text.
You might have come up with slightly different results, which is fine.
And when it comes to simple, push-button formatting, Excel has a much more powerful feature that ties together everything you’ve been doing so far into a single, elegant interface.
This feature gives you more speed and flexibility along with access to the visual acumen of  a professional designer.
Hey! Doesn’t Excel have a faster way to do all that formatting? Can’t I just push a button and make it happen?
Cell styles are fully supported in Excel 2007 for Windows and later, but as of  this writing, their support in Mac versions of  Excel is spotty.
Cell styles keep formatt ing consistent for e lements that repeat You’ll usually have several headings in your spreadsheets, and you’ll want those headings to look the same.
Styles let you tell Excel which cells are headings and then what you want the formatting of  those headings to be.
And styles aren’t just for headings: you can use them for any elements that repeat.
They’re especially handy if you want, say, to change the look of all your Totals.
Instead of  finding each one, you can just change the style, and all the cells with that style will incorporate that change.
To take styles for a spin, select the cells you want to affect and then select a style with the Cell Styles button under the Home tab.
Ctrl-click and ctrl-shift-click to select more than one cell at a time.
With your ce l l styles se lected, use Themes to change your look.
Assign the cell styles listed on the facing page to your CRMFreak income statement data.
You’ll have to play around with the Heading styles to make sure that the cell borders extend into column B and that the sizing of  the heading is correct.
Go to Page Layout > Themes and try out a few of  the configurations.
These buttons read your cell styles and can change your formatting in a bunch of quick and easy ways.
Once you’ve told Excel which cell styles match up with your data, then the fun can really begin.
Head on over to the Themes button group under the Page Layout tab and play around with the prepackaged themes and font/color configurations.
You assigned cell styles and themes to your income statement data.
Here’s an example spreadsheet…your own probably looks different, depending on what you chose.
These cells have a color that makes them stand out.
Q: A while back, you said something about the design elements in the themes being “professional.” What did you mean?
A: The prepackaged themes have been carefully selected so that the colors and fonts all complement each other.
Q: I’ve heard a lot of people complain about how ugly writing and spreadsheets and slide shows look when they’re made in Microsoft Office, but this looks like Microsoft has made it pretty easy to employ good visual design.
A: While it’s always been possible to create visually welldesigned documents in Microsoft Office programs, it’s not always been easy.
Some of the templates in previous versions of the software are indeed ugly, and sometimes you’ve really had to work hard to make your documents look good.
But Microsoft has become progressively more sensitive to people’s need to have good design, and recent versions of Office show it.
Q: So are some of the same themes that I’ve been seeing in Excel available in other Office programs, like Word or PowerPoint?
A: Yes! And integration throughout Office is precisely the idea.
If you make use of styles everywhere you can, you’ll have no trouble having consistent visual integration across all your documents.
Q: Are there limitations to what I can do in Excel in terms of visual design?
A: There are loads of features you’ll find in graphic design programs that you won’t find in Excel.
But even when it comes to making drawings, Excel is surprisingly powerful for a numbercrunching program.
If you have a specialized design objective, you should still poke around under the Page Layout tab before reaching for your graphic design program.
Q: What if I don’t like any of the color configurations that Excel offers? Can I make up my own themes?
Making your own theme would be a great idea if your business already has its own design standards—official corporate fonts and colors.
Under these circumstances, the benefits of using styles and themes in Excel would be immense.
The boss wants more than just a pretty income statement.
He wants you to add a balance sheet to your spreadsheet, integrate the new elements visually, and make sure it all fits on a single page.
Better start thinking about how you’re going to accomplish all that!
Oh, by the way, I want you to do the balance sheet, too.
Here are small versions of the CRMFreak income statement and balance sheet.
Use proximity and alignment to group like things together Why doesn’t your drawing look like one of  these spreadsheets?
You probably didn’t draw your spreadsheet that way because you intuitively grasp the fundamental visual design principles of  proximity and alignment.
By bunching like elements together and keeping all your elements in alignment with each other, you make your document more readable and usable.
Write formulas to total the Assets, Liabilities, and Stockholder’s equity, and then apply the cell styles to the balance sheet.
When you paste the data, be sure that the elements in both the income statement and the balance sheet are grouped and aligned correctly.
Switch to page layout mode to see how your spreadsheet will look on the printed page.
Does it fit on one page? If  not, scale it down on the page layout bar.4
You just incorporated a balance sheet into your spreadsheet, added some formulas, and formatted the whole thing.
Be sure to add some spacing to separate the balance sheet and income statement.
The cell styles make incorporating new information into your visual design a snap.
You need to bring the scale down on your spreadsheet a little to get it all to fit on the page.
I was delighted but not the least bit surprised by your excellent work with our financial statements.
You handled the formula work with grace and crafted a sophisticated yet crystalclear presentation.
It was truly a tour de force and I am confident it played a large role in the favorable reviews we received from the analysts this season.
The only thing to do with talent like yours is to give it more responsibility with bigger jobs.
Expect to see bigger challenges with bigger rewards very soon!
The spreadsheet is well designed and makes my job as an interpreter much easier.
CRMFreak used your spreadsheet as part of the materials they made available to stock analysts, and the critical consensus has been overwhelmingly positive.
Well, on paper your application looks fantastic, but I have to say that when I checked your references a rather different picture emerged....
No matter how creative and brilliant your formula is, it won’t do you much good if it does.
In this chapter, you’ll exploit absolute and relative references as.
Your computer business is in disarray As the boss of  Ace Computer Manufacturing, you know how critical it is to maintain your profit margins in the volatile and competitive business of  selling computers.
You need to get on top of  your supply chain: are you marking up your computers enough to make a profit? You need to take control of  your data to figure it out.
You’ve got a lot of satisfied customers in your computer business.
Finally, Mom got me a 64 bit!What would I do without.
Here are last quarter’s costs and sales for lowend computers.
The figures below list the cost and revenue for a single computer.
To calculate the Total cost, add the cost of the components.
To calculate the Gross profit margin, subtract the total cost by the sale price and divide the whole thing by the sale price.
Sale price is the amount you charge for your computers at retail.
Bonus: Format this figure as a percentage by clicking the “%” icon under the Home tab.
This is what a customer would pay for your computer.
You created the formulas to calculate the total cost and the gross profit margin.
Use parentheses to keep the difference between total cost and sale price in the numerator.
That’s not bad at all nowadays! So far, so good.
This formula calculates the cost of sale to produce one low-end computer.
You need a function to find the lowest price on the memory worksheet.
We haven’t ordered the parts and need to find the cheapest configuration.
In the computer industry, component prices are always changing, so in order to ensure that you’re getting a healthy margin on the computers you sell, you need to make sure you’re getting the best deal you can.
If  you bought the least expensive acceptable parts, how much would the resulting configuration cost?
And, in case you hadn’t guessed it already, the function that tells you the largest number in a list is MAX.
What you need to do now is write MIN formulas to find the lowest cost for each of  these components and see how much your low-end computer configuration will cost this quarter.
Using that information, you’ll be able to forecast your profitability.
When you have a range of  numbers and want to figure out what is the smallest number in that range, use the MIN function.
You’re going to fill in these blanks with MIN formulas.
We need a formula that will return the lowest amount we can pay for memory.
If  you write your formula the way you’ve been writing formulas, how will your formula know which sheet to refer to for the data?
How would you design a reference to ensure that the correct sheet is being pointed to?
You just grappled with the question of how to refer to cells across worksheets.
If  you write your formula the way you’ve been writing formulas, how will your formula know which sheet to refer to for the data?
How would you design a reference to ensure that the correct sheet is being pointed to?
Let’s see if Excel can help figure out these ranges....
If you type just this, Excel can help you figure out your range.
Don’t type out the range, just select it with your mouse.
Then use your mouse to select the data on the LowMem sheet.
Let Excel f i l l in ranges by start ing your formula and using your mouse Excel does indeed have a syntax for pointing to ranges that exist on worksheets other than the worksheet where your function resides.
One handy trick in writing formulas with arguments that involve cell ranges is to start writing a formula, getting to the argument of  your function where you want to put the range but not typing anything:
Now, instead of  typing the reference, just use your mouse to select the data you want.
Go ahead and click on a different worksheet (or even a different workbook) and select your data with the mouse.
Excel got the r ight answer using a more sophist icated reference When you use the mouse to select the data you want your MIN formula to evaluate, Excel automatically fills in the range for that data, even if  the data is on a different worksheet.
Here’s how Excel describes the range for memory prices you want to evaluate.
The range does look a little similar to the first one you tried…
So far, we haven’t included an element to describe which worksheet we want to reference, and Excel has taken that to mean that we want to reference the same worksheet where we’ve put our formula.
Now filling in the lowest prices for the rest of the components will be a snap!
Here’s Excel building your reference for you as you select it.
You know everything you need to know to complete the rest of this spreadsheet and forecast the profitability of low-end computers for next quarter.
Using the MIN function and pointing to the hard disk (LowHDs) and motherboard (LowBds) pricing worksheets, calculate what is the lowest price you can get for these components.
Your sales team has determined that the highest competitive price you can charge your customers is $390
Type in the formula to calculate your new cost total in B9
Type in a projected $390 sale price of your computer here.
Make sure it’s formatted correctly by pressing the “%” button under the Home tab.
You just projected your profitability for low-end computers, given your component costs, for the next quarter.
Looks like you’ll have a handy profit per unit this quarter.
Looks like your profit on this low-end configuration will be 11%
A quick way to select all the numbers in column D for your MIN formula: you can type MIN(LowBds!D:D)
If there are other elements in the column, such as text or blank spaces, Excel will just ignore them.
Sweet! That definitely means that the computers you sell will earn a higher profit margin.
Copy your new formula and paste it to calculate the motherboard and hard disk costs.
One of the new guys has just persuaded all our vendors to give us a 5% discount for this quarter.
You might want to incorporate the good news into your projections.
You just tried to write formulas to calculate a discounted cost of memory, hard disks, and motherboards.
Use absolute references to prevent shif t ing on copy/paste You’ve thus far been using relative references in your formulas…
To tell Excel to make a reference absolute, the syntax is to add dollar signs.
If  you put a dollar sign before the column, the row can shift, and if  you put one before the row, the column can shift, and if  you use two dollar signs, the reference will stay totally fixed.
But sometimes you want a reference to stay fixed no matter where you copy and paste it.
In that case, you need to use an absolute reference.
If you wanted to hold the column but not the row, you’d only put a dollar sign in front of the B.
Rewrite your memory discount formula to include an absolute reference to cell B4
Copy that formula and paste it for the motherboard and hard disk costs.
Looks like you’re going to get to pay yourself  a big dividend this quarter, assuming that sales go well.…
With your corrected formula using absolute references, you were able to copy and paste to your motherboard and hard disk fields, showing your discounted component costs.
Those dollar signs are starting to make the reference hard to read.
Can’t the formula just say in plain language what you want to evaluate?
As important as references are, they can become unwieldy once your formulas get long and numerous.
If  your references start to confuse you, you can turn to a powerful feature of Excel called named ranges....
How the reference would look if you copied/paste d it to.
Absolute references gi ve you a lot of opt ions Depending on where you think you might need to copy your references, you should always consider using absolute references to make sure your formulas point where you want them to.
Named ranges simplif y your formulas This reference takes a moment to understand.
Even if  you wrote it yourself, chances are, in the future you’ll forget its meaning and have to go back and forth to make sure you know where the reference is pointing.
When you used named ranges, you can replace those references with a plain-language name of  your choosing.
And once you name your ranges, which by the way are by definition absolute references, you can drop them right into your formulas.
You will often have to go back and check where references are pointing, just to jog your memory.
A formula like this can be a real bear to check.
You can actually use words like these as references in your formulas.
Let’s try out named ranges by incorporating one into your discount calculation formula.
Instead of making the discount value reference B$4, let’s make it just discount.
To do this, select cell B4 and then highlight and delete the reference at the top left.
Copy and paste your new formula to overwrite the old motherboard and hard disk discount formulas.
Highlight this blank here, replace the reference text with the word Discount, and then press Enter.
You just took named ranges for a spin for the first time.
Named ranges are absolute, so it’ll copy/ paste without shifting.
But we need to cover medium- and high-end computers as well.
Let’s take a look at the data for the other computer lines and see what we can do.
With all this data, you’d have to write a ton of formulas It could take you quite a while to come up with this.
Here are all the formulas you’d need if you did it the long way.
But going through a whole bunch of  cells and ranges and naming them individually takes a lot of  time, too!
Wouldn't it be dreamy if Excel would just name your ranges for you? But I know it's just a fantasy....
Excel’s Tables make your references quick and easy When you click inside your data and click Table under the Insert tab, Excel gives you all sorts of  options, including automatically generated range names.
Once you’ve created your table, you can use a special syntax called structured references to simplify your range names.* Here’s how you make a table.
Easy, right? And you don’t have to worry about making your references point to sheets anymore, since Excel knows how to find your table in a workbook using the structured reference.
How each would look if you copied and pasted to C2
Select your data, then head over to the Insert tab and click Table.
Change your table name from Table1 to something more meaningful.
Now you have a table! Go ahead and start using it for structured references.
This new formatting shows you that your data is now a recognized table.
If you don’t like the formatting of the table, you can select a different style under the Design tab.
Structured references are another one of those Excel 2007 and later–only features.
How each would look if you copied and pasted to C2
Let’s finish off our computer spreadsheet with some structured references.…
We’re only going to scratch the surface of the power of structured references.
See the Help files in Excel for more information about their full capabilities.
If your data isn’t in a tabular form, named ranges are the way to go.
Remember, references to named ranges and structured references never shift.
Between the $A$1 style of  references that you’ve learned and the references that you can name, you’ve spanned a broad universe of  possibilities for referring to your data inside of  formulas.
The type of reference you’ll use will depend on your specific problem.
Using tables and structured references, calculate the profitability forecast of your mid-range and high-end computer models.
For each table that describes a component, create a table using the button under the Insert tab.
Using the same approach as for evaluating low-end PCs, calculate the minimum costs for each component.
For each table that describes a component, create a table using the button under the Insert tab.
Using the same approach you had for evaluating low-end PCs, calculate the minimum costs for each component.
Did you notice that Excel tries to help you figure out which structured reference you’re looking for?
Once your structured references are set up, writing formulas is a snap.
Just press down-arrow and tab if Excel correctly starts to fill out your reference name.
Use the same formulas for price and profit that you used recently.
Your prof itabili t y forecasts proved accurate Business is great, and your sales guys are happier than ever!
But only if you know how to look at them.
Polit ical consultants need help decoding their fundraising database The Main Campaign is working for the Dataville mayor and wants to solicit his supporters for money.
The data is a list of  their contributors’ donations from the past year.
And while the data is of  a high quality, at over 4,000 rows, there’s quite a lot of  it!
The small fries are important, but before anything else, the Main Campaign needs to get in touch with the big contributors.
How could you change your perspective on it to show you the top donors?
How did  you decide you might change perspective on this data to show you the top donors?
Sort changes the order of rows in your data The Sort buttons are a useful tool that enables you to reshuffle the order of  the rows in your data.
The Sort buttons can be found under the Data tab of  the Ribbon.
The plain ol’ Sort button lets you do more sophisticated sorting.
Maybe you could put all the big donors up here…
That way, you’d be able to group the big contributors together.
To sort ascending means to order your data from first to last or smallest to largest, and to sort descending means to do the opposite.
There are many occasions where you’ll want to use Sort to change the order of  your data, but Sort is especially useful when you’re looking at data for the first time and trying to get a feel for what’s in it.
Let’s sort your data to group all the big contributors together.
Select any cell in the column you want to sort by.
Since you want to sort by donation here, you’d pick the Donation column.
Click one of  the Sort buttons to sort your data.
Which button should you press to get big donors up top: Ascending or Descending?
You want to sort by donation, so put your cursor in this column.
Sort by this field in a way that will send the larger donors up to the top of the list.
Were you able to bring all the big contributors to the top of your list through sorting?
Select a cell in the column you want to sort by.
Which button should you press to get big donors up top?
You can also select the whole column, and Excel will ask you whether you want it to sort just that column or the entire table.
All the small donors are way down at the bottom of the list now.
Sort ing shows you different perspect i ves on a large data set When you look at data for the first time, it’s a good idea to sort by different columns to look for visible patterns.
Excel can figure out which columns are in your table… usually.
If Excel doesn’t sort all your columns together, it can wreck your database.
Always save your data first and check it after sorting to make sure you and Excel got it right.
Let’s see what the Main Campaign has to say about this newly organized data.…
When exploring your data, it never hurts to try sorting by a bunch of columns.
You never know what you might see when you look at your data from different perspectives.
That shows me who the big donors are, but not where they are.
Could you sort by zip code and then by donation size? That way, I could look at donation-sorted sublists grouped by zip.
Let’s see if we can fulfill the client’s request: first to sort the data by zip code, and then to sort it by donation.
This sort will enable us to look at the biggest givers by grouping them by geography.
To execute this new and more complex sort, start by clicking the big Sort button.
Be sure your cursor is inside your data table first.
In the dialog that pops up, start by telling Excel to sort your data by zip.
Now click Add Level and add a new level to sort by donation.
You may receive a warning dialog box…just do what you think is best.
Were you able to sort the data by zip and then donation?
To execute this new and more complex sort, start by clicking the big Sort button.
Be sure your cursor is inside your data table first.
In the dialog that pops up, start by telling Excel to sort your data by zip.
Now click Add Level and add a new level to sort by donation.
You may receive a warning dialog box…just do what you think is best.
It’s sorted by zip, and then it’s sorted by donation.
Now you can look at the top donors from each zip code.
Q: What do some of those other options mean inside of the Sort dialog box?
A: There are lots of different ways you can sort besides alphabetizing text and sorting numbers from smallest to largest or vice versa.
Q: Why would I want to sort by color? A: Very often people will highlight cells in their spreadsheet to be different colors, and you’ll see long spreadsheets that have various elements highlighted.
If you’d like to group those elements together, you can sort by color.
Q: Is it good formatting practice to highlight cells by color? It seems like that would be an alternative to sorting in terms of drawing your eye to various parts of the spreadsheet.
A: Generally there are better ways to tag data than highlighting cells.
You can sort by color, but most formulas can’t read your cells’ formatting.
So if you want to tag interesting cells, it’s better to add a column and insert your own text or Boolean functions (which you’ll learn about later on)
What else? A: Under the Order drop box, you can set up a Custom List.
Custom lists enable you to create any arbitrary sorting you want.
So if Excel doesn’t automatically sort your data in exactly the way you need it to, you can create a custom list that shows exactly how you need that data sorted.
Q: How big of a problem is it when Excel sorts one column but not another?
Think about what would happen with this data: each donation amount is tied to a specific person, so if you changed the order of the donations but kept the order of people the same, you wouldn’t know who gave what anymore.
Q: How do I avoid it? A: This is a reminder of a very important principle of dealing with data: always keep copies of your original data.
Once you’ve done an analysis of the data, it’s always a good idea to check your data against the original to make sure that nothing weird happened.
A: Sorting is another place where the Tables feature you learned about in Chapter 2 comes in handy.
If you define your data set as a table, then you are being really explicit with Excel about the dimensions of your data.
Q: So then Excel always knows what data is in my table, and it won’t accidentally just sort a single column.
You don’t have to define your data as a table in order to sort it correctly, but for the uber-paranoid the Table feature is the way to go.
Now you can see how many large donations fall into each zip.
Yeah, that’s OK, but I’m still having a hard time seeing it all.
I just need a way to look at more of the data at once.
It’s a nonobvious but important part of data analysis, and your client is right to want to be able to see the data better, not just group it correctly.
Scrolling all the way from the top to the bottom can take a long time…
What do you think of each of these solutions? Is it a good idea? Is one of them the best?
What can you do to help your client get a better perspective on the big picture of the data?
I can do this, but it isn’t really what the client is asking for.
This is a great idea! It would be great to be able to see a few thousand legible.
If I really can’t find a way to get the right.
Sometimes you need to look at the forest, and sometimes you.
Zooming in and out on data is something that spreadsheet ninjas do all the time.
See a lot more of your data with Zoom Sometimes you need to focus on a small part of  your data.
It’s about looking at as much of  the whole picture of  your data as you can see at once.
To zoom, click the View tab to get to the Zoom button.
Maybe you need to think really hard about Jada Luna!
If you look closely, you can see quite a lot.
Demanding is impressed! Without running any sort of  function or doing any sort of  formatting, you were able to sort and zoom your way to a greater clarity about his data.
But now he wants to focus on just one subset of the data.
You know you can’t just delete the data he doesn’t want to focus on.
How can you look at just the data he wants without changing the rest of  the data?
I believed in your abilities and I can see that I was right.
Filters hide data you don’t want to see Sorting and zooming have given you a rich big-picture perspective, but sometimes you want to look at just a slice of  data.
Filters are convenient because they give you a way to hide the data you don’t want to see.
It’s still very much there; it’s just conveniently out of  the way.
And just as with sorting, when you’re exploring a new data set for the first time, it’s a great idea to run filters to look at various subsets of  the data.
Select a cell in the column you want to filter and click Filter.
Use Filter drop boxes to te l l Exce l how to f i lter your data When you click on the Filter button, Excel puts a drop box on every column in your data table.
When you click on one of  the drop boxes, Excel gives you a bunch of  options for filtering the data based on the data in that column.
Each of  the seven zip codes represented in your data set are listed in the Filter drop box for ZIP.
Because they’re all checked, Excel is showing all of  them.
You tell Excel to sort from inside the Filter drop box.
These values are a complete list of all the different pieces of data in the ZIP column.
Uncheck “Select All” to reset the filter so that nothing is selected.
Click one of these to activate the Filter drop box for that column.
With the Filter drop box activated for the ZIP field, uncheck the Select All box so that none of  the zips are selected.
Apply another filter that shows only people with donations of  $1,000 or more.
Select the Donation filter drop box and then the options that you believe will show you only the individuals you want to see.
Something you should know about political campaigns: we move fast.
What I’m saying is, we need that 78723 data subset now.
With the Filter drop box activated for the ZIP field, uncheck the Select All box so that none of the zips is selected.
You can see your filter is working by looking at the blue row numbers.
Apply another filter that shows only people with donations of  $1,000 or more.
Select the Donation filter drop box and then the options that you believe will show you only the individual you want to see.
You need to select the Number Filter to add your Donation parameters.
All of the data is still there, but it’s hidden!
Great data work! We’ll raise a lot of money for the mayor with this.
One more thing…I met this guy the other day named Alex (I think)
He was a big donor, but I’d never heard of him, and now I can’t figure out who he is.
Maybe you could do one of your fancy filters and help me out?
A guy named Alex who’s a big giver? There could be tons of  people in the database named Alex! This could be like finding a needle in a haystack.
Your client found a big donor named Alex, or so he thinks.
To do this, click the Filter button twice: first to eliminate the filter, and second to start a new filter.
Use your filter to find Alex! What do you find?2
Do what you need to do to help your client!
Q: What ever happened to writing formulas? It seems like all this sorting, zooming, and filtering is really just a prelude to writing formulas, which is the real meat of data analysis.
A: It’d be better to say that good thinking about data is the substance of data analysis, not writing formulas or any other feature of Excel or any other software.
Q: So where do sort/zoom/filter and formulas fit into data analysis?
A: Sorting, zooming, and filtering are great tools to use to get a sense of what is inside data that you are looking at for the first time.
Sometimes you just need a better perspective on your data, and the way to get at that perspective is literally to look at the data in a bunch of different ways.
Q: So once I want to start drawing conclusions about data, I’m probably not going to need sort/zoom/filter so much, right?
It may be that your specific problem really needs nothing besides the perspective that these visualization tools give you.
Or it may be that you need to create a model that summarizes and manipulates the data once you’ve gotten the perspective you need.
Q: So that is where formulas come in? A: Yes.
Formulas, in their most general sense, take data as arguments and return new data.
If your analytic goals aren’t met by simply changing your point of view on the data, chances are you’ll need to hit the data with some formulas to achieve the manipulation or summary that you need.
Q: Still, it’s kind of cool just how much you can do with these visualization tools.
Don’t just accept without question the default zoom amount of Excel or the ordering of the data for analysis you receive.
You can use sorting, zooming, and filtering to change up your perspective in a big way, enabling you to understand your data better.
To do this, click the Filter button twice: first to eliminate the filter, and second to start a new filter.
What you see here depends on the specific filter you created.
Donat ions are pouring in! The Main Campaign was able to get in touch with Alec, and the lists you isolated have proven to be really valuable for the Dataville mayor’s fundraising efforts!
As I kicked off my campaign I was frankly somewhat surprised to discover all my top donors fully organized and taken care of.
I asked the Main Campaign what they’d done differently this year to achieve such expedient and efficient results.
I’ve suggested to the Main Campaign that they send all my campaign’s data work to you.
It’s quite a lot, but you’ve shown that you can handle it.
Sometimes, Excel will show you a number but think of it as text.
Excel will even show you data that is neither number.
Not only will this knowledge give you greater control over your.
Your doctor fr iend is on a deadline and has broken data He’s just completed a landmark study that evaluates the effectiveness of  a drug on a patient’s white blood cell counts, and his results are going to be really important for clinical practice.
His data is exhibiting weird behaviors that prevent him from using formulas.
Can you fix his data for him? If  you help, he’ll put your name on the paper he publishes.
My data is a mess and I need to submit my paper soon! What’s the etiology of these formula anomalies?
Let’s start off by trying to get the average white blood cell count for the pre-treatment control group.
Load the data and see if you can use the AVERAGE() function to calculate the average.
You just attempted to use the AVERAGE() function to get the average white blood cell count of the control group before treatment.
Excel evaluated the argument, didn’t like it, and spat out a #DIV/0! error.
But what is that error, and what does it mean? Click on the exclamation mark next to cell A34 to find out.
Under the hood, Excel is using the AVERAGE() formula like this.
The help screen for the error you receive will tell you the kinds of  things that are causing that error.
Sometimes there are a bunch of possible reasons you’re getting the error, and you need to rule some out in order to figure out which reason is in effect.
Maybe these green triangles have something to do with this weirdness.
Data in Excel can be text or numbers The problem in this case is that even though your data consists of  numbers, inside the spreadsheet those numbers have the wrong data type.
Excel uses data types to distinguish among different types of  data, and sometimes Excel gets data type assignments wrong.
Here, Excel has assigned the data type text to your blood cell counts when it should have assigned the type number.
This has big implications for how Excel uses the data.
What look like numbers to you can be represented in Excel as either numbers or text.
Sometimes, when you load data that looks like the numbers, Excel thinks it’s text.
These green triangles are actually the “Number stored as text” warning.
If you select a cell with a green triangle, you can click on a button that explains the warning.
The data type of your cell determines how functions can use the data in it.
Excel will recognize it and internally represent it as a number.
Pool Puzzle Your job is to take data types from the.
You may not use the same data type more than once.
Your goal is to figure out how Excel needs to represent data internally.
Note: Each thing from the pool can only be used once!
Pool Puzzle Answers You just classified a bunch of different.
Note: Each thing from the pool can only be used once!
Not only would it take a lot of  time, but there’s a really good chance that you’ll make typos.
In an analysis as important as this one, it’s crucial for the data to be accurate.
There’s got to be a better way to get Excel to see the white blood cell counts as numbers than retyping the data.…
I should have mentioned it...this issue can be a pain.
The database exports values, but Excel reads the values as text.
To fix the problem, we usually retype the data manually.
You need a funct ion that te l ls Excel to treat your text as a value Excel has functions to do all sorts of  stuff, including turning text into values.
You need a function that enables you to do this.
You need to take all these text values and convert them to number values.
We still need to figure out which function will actually do this....
Some tell you about the data type of  a cell, and some return values that change a cell’s data type.
Returns a value that says whether a cell has something in it besides text.
Tells you whether the data type of  a cell is text.
Returns the value of  a cell regardless of  whether a cell’s data type is “value.”
Tells you whether the cell in the formulas argument is a reference.
Which function will convert your text to numbers? Write your answer here.
Returns a value that says whether a cell has something in it besides text.
Tells you whether the data type of  a cell is text.
Returns the value of  a cell regardless of  whether a cell’s data type is “value.”
Tells you whether the cell in the formulas argument is a reference.
Write formulas down here to get the average for each column.
Were you able to create formulas to tell Excel to represent the text values as numbers, and then get the average for each group?
Here you go! These are the averages you’ve been looking for!
Q: When is changing data types likely to be an issue for me?
A: Chances are, you’re most likely to experience it when you load data into Excel that has been exported from another system, like a relational database.
Q: So Excel generally does a good job at figuring out my data types when I type data into my spreadsheet?
Excel is really smart at looking at what you type and assigning the correct data type.
What’s really important for you to know is that the visual representation of your data—how it looks and how it’s formatted—doesn’t necessarily tell you how Excel is representing the data internally.
Q: Why couldn’t AVERAGE() automatically recognize my numbers as numbers even if their data type is text?
A: For all Excel knew, you meant for the white blood cell counts to have the data type text.
While it’s not terribly common, there are cases where you need numerical values to be stored as text, and Excel doesn’t want to recast those values back to numbers if you have intentionally specified that they are text.
Q: Are numbers and text the only types of data I can use?
For example, the Boolean data type, which you’ll learn about later in this book, gives you two options: TRUE and FALSE.
Some of the functions you just saw, like ISTEXT(), return values that are of data type Boolean.
Q: What about the weird-looking error that the AVERAGE() formula returned? It certainly doesn’t look like a number, or a Boolean, or text.
Do you think that error values should have their own data type? While you’re chewing on that question, let’s take a closer look at errors.…
Those are exactly the figures I needed! Thank you so much.
I just need to do a few more things on my side to straighten things up, and we’ll be ready to submit the article.
A grad student also ran some stats…and there’s a problem.
My grad student just got a whole bunch of errors with the formulas he created.
Thought you were off  the hook, didn’t you? Just as soon as your friend set off  to do some work on his own, his grad student messed up the spreadsheet again.
Let’s take them one at a time, looking at the formulas that generated the errors.
REF! often happens when you paste a copied formula and some of its references point outside of the spreadsheet.
The formula with the #VALUE! error points to this cell and probably is looking for a number rather than text.
NAME? pops up when you type a formula name that doesn’t exist.
If SD() isn’t the right name for the standard deviation function, what is?
Errors are a special data type The designers of  Excel made errors their own special data type.
And by giving errors their own data type, they made it possible to create a number of  formulas that handle errors specifically.
Understanding how they work is critical to developing tight, functional spreadsheets.
Who am I?A bunch of errors and functions, in full costume, are playing a party game, “Who am I?” They’ll give you a clue.
You try to guess who they are, based on what they say.
Fill in the blanks to the right to identify the attendees.
Name I return different values depending on whether my argument is an error or not.
I tell you whether my argument is an error or not.
I return a number to you that specifies what sort of error you’ve passed to me as an argument.
You get me when you forget to enter a required argument into a function.
Who am I?A bunch of errors and functions, in full costume, are playing a party game, “Who am I?” They’ll give you a clue.
You try to guess who they are, based on what they say.
Fill in the blanks to the right to identify the attendees.
Name I return different values depending on whether my argument is an error or not.
I tell you whether my argument is an error or not.
I return a number to you that specifies what sort of error you’ve passed to me as an argument.
You get me when you forget to enter a required argument into a function.
Looks like you’re getting a really upclose understanding of errors.
There are a bunch of problems with this spreadsheet, but you know what you need to know to correct them all at once.
For each error, look at the formula and correct it.
SD() is not the standard deviation formula…see if you can find the correct formula name in the Help files.
Go through each of these formulas and see whether you can fix the error.
Plus, the formula down here loses its error, since it refers to the now-corrected cell B37
The Help files show that the formula for standard deviation is actually STDEV()
The change in standard deviation for the Experiment group is now correct, but the change for Control still needed to be fixed.
The error on the old formula happens because it refers to cell C36
Change this formula to refer to C37, and all is fixed!All the ranges in these formulas.
I want to thank you so much for all your help with our data project.
If it had not been for you, we would have had to retype a bunch of data, probably making mistakes, and we never would have gotten to the bottom of all our formula errors.
Teen vampire chick flicks An opportunity to promote healthy blood?
The simple truth is that dates and times are a really special.
I think there’s space on my calendar, but could you repeat that time again in “mm/dd/yyy hh:mm:ss.0”?
Do you have t ime to amp up your training for the Massachusetts Marathon? You’re an avid runner who is ready to make the transition to an elite status, pursuing more prestigious, competitive, and difficult races.
Or rather, you could be ready with the right training program.
Elite running is all about scheduling your practices and races so that you’re at the right level of fitness at the right time.
Luckily, you have a trainer friend who wants to help.
We could then use your 10K time as a benchmark for your marathon goals.
Could this program be your ticket to an elite running status?
Better take a look at the schedules to make sure her program fits with a 10K race.
Is there a 10K race you could do that takes place shortly after the training program?
You’ll use these dates to calculate whether there’s a race in the right time frame.
Nothing happens when you try to change the date format.
Wow…Excel sees text, but it thinks it might be a number?
If  you run the ISTEXT() function on any of the cells containing your date data, the TRUE value the function returns shows that the date is indeed text.
You know what to do when you have a numerical value that needs to be converted from text! And while the dates here aren’t simple integers, they’re still numbers of  a sort.
Why not try running the VALUE() function on them? Maybe Excel can figure out that they’re dates.
VALUE() returns a number on dates stored as text The VALUE() formula takes one look at your date and returns values without any errors or warnings.
But what exactly is it? It’s great that you have a number, but now you need to know what to do with it.
Why would Excel return a five-digit number in response to your date text?
VALUE() crunches your input text with no problem at all.
This is how Excel deals with dates: by converting them to integers, even though Excel applies formatting to the dates so that you can read them.
Excel formats the integers so you can see them like this.
If you subtract one date from another, what would the resulting number mean?
You usually need VALUE() only when you’re importing certain data.
If  you simply type in a date, Excel almost always can figure.
Subtract ing one date from another te l ls you the number of days bet ween the t wo dates Let’s say you want to find out how many days there are between today and the date of  the first 10K.
When you refer to date values already in other cells and when you use the DATEVALUE() formula, Excel sees your date values as simple integers.
And since each number represents a count of  days, subtracting one from the other shows the amount of  days between the two dates.
Now that you’ve gotten the hang of  how Excel deals with dates, you’re ready to start running some calculations of  your own.
If you already have your date values in another cell, you can use a reference rather than DATEVALUE.
DATEVALUE() converts date text to a number inside of a formula.
Using your knowledge about how Excel represents dates, whip your 10K spreadsheet into shape and figure out how many days each race is from today.
Fill column B with formulas using the VALUE() function to make Excel return the integer representation of  your dates.
Reformat the dates in column B to look like dates, not integers.2
You need to use this function, since Excel can’t convert from text to date integers inside of formulas unless you tell it to.
You just ran a bunch of operations to try to calculate the numbers of days between today and the 10K races you might do after training.
These are integers representing dates that have now been formatted to look like the dates they represent.
Fill column B with formulas using the VALUE() function to make Excel return the integer representation of  your dates.
Reformat the dates in column B to look like dates, not integers.2
These values are formatted like dates, but they should look like plain integers.
When subtract ing dates, watch your formatt ing When you wrote your date subtraction formula, Excel based the format of  its return value on the format of  the cells that went into the arguments of  the formula.
Once you change the formatting from Date to General, you can see your answer.
Inside your spreadsheet, these two values are in the Date format.
This value, on the other hand, should be in the General format.
This is exactly how you want your day calculation results to look.
Just click here to put a selection into the General format.
Looks like you don’t have t ime to complete training before a 10K.
The first 10K after training ends is a ways off.
Ideally, you’d be able to do your 10K around this point in time.
You know, I bet you’re ready to start training for marathons.
Why not take my 4-month marathon training course? Then maybe you can do a qualifying marathon to make you eligible for.
Now you just need to see whether the Dataville Marathon takes place within the 4-month time frame....
Most people who need to do date computations are going to need more power than counting days through simple arithmetic provides.
It makes sense that Excel would have more versatile formulas....
DATEDIF() wil l calculate t ime bet ween dates using a varie ty of measures It’s an old-school, little-known, strangely undocumented but very powerful function.
With DATEDIF(), you specify a start date, an end date, and then a text constant that represents the unit you want to use.
In this case, the “y” text constant tells Excel to ascertain the number of years between the two dates, and in the next exercise you’ll look at your other options.
Choose from one of Excel’s six predetermined text strings to instruct the formula to use the scale you want.
The number of  months between the dates, ignoring days and years.
The number of  days between the dates, ignoring months and years.
The number of  days between the dates, ignoring the years.
Which is which? Draw arrows to link the text constants with the right behavior.
The number of  months between the dates, ignoring days and years.
The number of  days between the dates, ignoring months and years.
The number of  days between the dates, ignoring the years.
Now write a DATEDIF() function to see whether your class is finished in time for the two upcoming Massachusetts qualifying marathons: the Bitburg Marathon and the Dataville Marathon.
Be sure to give each cell of data a text label!
In these cells, write DATEDIF() formulas that calculate how many months there are between today and the marathons.
If you start a 4-month marathon training class, will you have time to do either the Bitburg or the Dataville Marathons, which are qualifiers for the Massachusetts Marathon?
Don’t forget to use an absolute reference to point to today’s date.
Since the training program is 4 months, the Bitburg Marathon is out of the question.
The Dataville Marathon is 5 months away, so you’ll be finished with your program by then.
What’s the pace of a 3:30 marathon? If  you run a marathon in three hours and thirty minutes, how long would it take you on average to run each mile? You need to do a time calculation.
If Excel represents days as integers, how do you think Excel represents hours, seconds, and minutes?
And if  you are doing really heavy time computations, you can have Excel’s decimal numbers go all the way to thousands of  a second (sorry, if  you want to count nanoseconds, you’ll just have to use regular decimal numbers and remember what they mean)
Your coach wants to know whether your current running pace is where it needs to be to make you a strong candidate for qualifying for Massachusetts.
You just ran some calculations to determine whether your current pace is an adequate starting point for your marathon training.
When you type in a time value, Excel automatically recognizes it.
Dates and times can be tricky, so good for you for learning how to use them.
This is a date and a time all in one value!
That number is a date and a time combined together into the same value! Better type this number into Excel and reformat it to see when you should show up for the first practice!
Dates are numbers to the left of  the decimal point, and times are numbers to the right of  the decimal point, so what about values with numbers on both sides of  the decimal point?
Click on the More Number Formats area of  the data formatting drop box on the Ribbon and convert your cell to a m/d/y h:mm format.
Combine a date and a time into the same value by having digits before and after the decimal point.
At what time did you determine you need to show up to your first practice?
Open your spreadsheet and type 40336.20833 into a blank cell.
Click on the More Number Formats area of  the data formatting drop box on the Ribbon and convert your cell to a m/d/y h:mm format.
You qualif ied for the Massachusetts Marathon Elite running is all about effective planning, and with the help of  your coach, not to mention your impressive Excel-savvy, you ran a 3:30 Dataville Marathon and qualified for Massachusetts!
Over many years and many versions, the program has accumulated specialized functions.
But what is a problem for you is the group of functions that you don’t know.
They both have their strong points, but how do I find the one that best suits my needs?
Should you rent addit ional parking? You’re in charge of  the Dataville Convention Center parking program.
They do a big entertainment business in Dataville, but they have a problem.
If  they are expecting more than 1,000 ticket buyers to attend an event, they need to rent more parking spaces.
In the upcoming month, are they expecting more than 1,000 attendees for any of  their events? Your challenge is to find out using their ticket sales data, and you’ll get free box seats to your favorite shows if  you can set up a workflow.
You need formulas to count tickets sold for each day in this month’s weekends.
Here’s their ticket sales spreadsheet for the coming month, which you’ll load in a few moments.
Each line of this spreadsheet represents a single ticket sold.
Let’s still assume that 6/5/2010 is today.This is important stuff!
Tells you which in a range of  numbers is smallest.
Tells you whether a cell is of  data type text.
Returns the difference between dates using a metric you specify.
Can any of  these formulas help you solve your parking prediction problem?
Function Review Here are all the functions you’ve learned so far.
Tells you which in a range of  numbers is smallest.
Tells you whether a cell is of  data type text.
Returns the difference between dates using a metric you specify.
Can any of  these formulas help you solve your parking prediction problem?
You need a plan to f ind more funct ions Finding and learning new functions in Excel is one of  the core skills you need to develop.
Excel has hundreds of  functions, and it would take forever for you to read through all of  them every time you wanted to learn a new formula.
Click the blue button on the top right to get help on Excel functions.
It could take a long time to learn all these.
Excel’s he lp screens are loaded with t ips and tr icks.
It used to be that you’d never look at the documentation for Excel or any other computer program.
No matter whether it was on the printed page or on computer help screens, it was hard to read and poorly written.
The current generation of  help documentation is written to be understood by real, live human beings like you.
In fact, it’s so useful that you should dip into the docs occasionally just to explore the new features, not just for when you’re looking for a specific formula.
To get help on any of  Excel’s scads and scads of formulas, start by clicking the help button on the top right of  the Excel screen.
Here’s a closer look at Excel’s main help page, the page you get when you click on the blue help button.
Circle the topic that will help you find the functions you need.
Different versions of Excel have slightly different lists, so yours might not look exactly like this.
Upon closer inspection, what did you learn when you looked at the main help page?
Probably worth checking out if you’ve become accustomed to a previous version of Excel.
Circle the topic that will help you find the functions you need.
Click on it, then on “List of  worksheet functions (by category).”
We need to look at the Function Reference to find the new function we need.
Here’s the convent ion center ’s t icket database for the next month.
This data has only weekend ticket sales, because attendance never comes close to exceeding 1,000 on weekdays.
What you need to do is create a list of  weekend days for the remainder of  the month and then count the number of  tickets sold for each of  those days.
Each record represents a single ticket sold for a single event on a single date.
Your task is to take this ticket data and see which days will have more than 1,000 visitors to the Dataville Convention Center.
This data set is already set up into a table, so you can use structured references.
If you scroll down, you’ll see that this is a really big spreadsheet.
We need to summarize ticket sales for weekend shows for the remainder of the month.
First, let’s create a table that lists the weekend days in this month.
Create a new sheet in your document by clicking the “new sheet” tab.
Double-click on your new sheet’s tab, and rename the sheet Summary.
Generate a series of  numbers that represent the weekend days of this month.
Follow the example below and the instructions in the annotations.
In this cell, type a formula to add 1 day to today, creating the day for tomorrow.
In this cell, type a formula to add 7 days to today, creating the day for next Saturday.
Copy and paste the formulas you just created in these cells to represent the remaining Saturdays and Sundays of this month.
You just endeavored to create a list of numbers representing the remaining weekend days of this month.
Create a new sheet in your document by clicking the “new sheet” tab.
Double-click on your new sheet’s tab, and rename the sheet Summary.
Generate a series of  numbers that represent the weekend days of  this month.
When you copy the formulas, the references shift to give you the days you need.
If the 27th is a Sunday, it’s the last weekend day of the month.
Now let’s make some proper date values out of these numbers.
The problem is, we don’t yet have the formula to do it.
Under the help screen, click “Function reference,” then “List of worksheet functions (by category),” then “Date and time functions.”
Take a look at these functions, and click on any that seem promising.
Which one do you think you can use to build proper date values out of the day integers you’ve created, and why?
You just inspected all of Excel’s date functions at once.
Did you find one that you think will enable you to create dates out of the numbers you entered to represent this month’s weekend days?
We could use DATEVALUE() if we had text, but we already have a number.
A bunch of these functions are for converting proper date numbers to something else.
There’s lots of interesting stuff here, but none of it is useful right now.
Anatomy of a funct ion reference Here’s the help window for the DATE function.
The documentation for individual functions is really interesting and useful.
Not only can you use the docs to find out what functions do, but you can also use them to learn about functions’ eccentricities—all the different types of arguments they accept and all the sorts of values they return, including explanations for why different errors might result from the same formula.
This is a precise specification of what the formula does.
Here’s an example that’s a lot like what we need to do (except you’ll use references for the days, since you’ve already created them)
There’s lots more specific stuff about how the function works if you scroll down.
Use the syntax to create a list of weekends with the DATE function on your spreadsheet.
Were you able to implement the date function in your spreadsheet to get real date values out of the integers you created to represent the days?
You can just type in the year, since it’s the same for every formula.
Copy and paste the formula for each of your weekend days.
Remember, what we’re after is the dates for which we should expect more than 1,000 people.
Can you write some sort of formula to tell me which dates fit this criteria?
Better get your spreadsheet ready for this last figure and head back to the function reference to find the formula to do this.
Funct ions are organized by data type and discipline Now you’re back in the function reference, looking for something that can count tickets for each date.
Where to start? It was obvious when you had to build those dates: you just looked in the date category.
When searching for a function, pick a category first by thinking about your problem, and then inspect individual formulas in that category.
Note: Each thing from the pool can be used only once!
I use the ______________ category to calculate how many payments I have left on my mortgage.
The ______________ category would help me extract the first name out of  a cell that had first and last names.
If  I need to calculate sine and cosine, the ______________ category is the place to go.
Formulas that deal with TRUE/FALSE values are in the ____________ category.
Note: Each thing from the pool can be used only once!
I use the ______________ category to calculate how many payments I have left on my mortgage.
The ______________ category would help me extract the first name out of  a cell that had first and last names.
If  I need to calculate sine and cosine, the ______________ category is the place to go.
Formulas that deal with TRUE/FALSE values are in the ______________ category.
The ______________ category is what I need for counting instances of a date.
Under the statistical category, pick the function that will count instances of each date.
Implement the function to say how much parking you’ll need for each date.
Hint: You may want to look carefully at all the COUNT functions.
You need a function that counts instances of the dates in this column…
Under the statistical category, pick the function that will count instances of  each date.
The criterion is just the thing you want to count.
You can use the range of dates in the ticket sales here.
You can use a reference to the date you want to count here.
Implement the function to say how much parking you’ll need for each date.
You can use any reference style you want to refer to the Tickets worksheet.
Here’s the first argument: the range containing elements you want to count.
Here’s the thing you want to count inside that range.
Your spreadsheet shows t icket counts summarized for each date.
Any chance you could show me only the list of dates that expect more than 1,000 people?
The COUNT family of  formulas is a really versatile way to analyze repetitive elements in a list.
The formulas enable you to get the size of  a list, count the numbers in a list, count the blank cells in a list, and count based on multiple criteria.
You’ll almost certainly have use for one or more of  these formulas in the future, and when you do, you can just head over to the help docs and use your understanding of  them to figure out which formula matches your problem.
Use an Excel feature you’ve learned to generate a list of days where expected attendance is greater than 1,000 people.
Q: Now that I know how to look up functions, does this mean that I know all I need to know?
A: You’re definitely well on your way to being an Excel master.
A strong knowledge of how to use formulas is what really separates people who use Excel casually to keep lists and people who use it to make their data sing.
Q: I’m serious: how much about Excel is there left for me to know, if I know how to use the help screens to get functions?
A: In the remainder of the book, there are two more chapters (one on text data and one on Boolean data) that are about functions, and the other chapters are about other powerful features of Excel.
But you’ve learned most of what you need to know to be good with formulas.
What is left—for functions, at least—is mainly just figuring out which ones you need for your own work, and then the techniques you need to use to make them work well.
Q: What’s the difference between knowing functions and using “techniques” with formulas?
A: This is where the magic happens with Excel—when you use formulas together in clever combinations to achieve your analytic goals.
It’s one thing to understand your problem, another to understand Excel functions, and another thing entirely to be clever when it comes to matching up the problem with Excel functions.
Q: Sounds like something that just needs practice and experimentation.
People who are good at Excel have generally spent a lot of time working and reworking their data in a bunch of different ways with a bunch of different formulas.
It’s only through that process that they discover the mind-blowing, clever solutions for the analysis of their own problems.
A: And be aware of features and functions of Excel that you’ve never used before.
You never know whether something will be useful for you unless you try it out.
Q: What about these pivot tables I’ve heard about? Are they a type of function?
Pivot tables are one of the most powerful features of Excel besides functions, and we haven’t touched on them yet, even though they’re coming up.
But first, we need to clean up the Convention Center’s data for the COO.…
What Excel operation did you need to generate the list of dates where expected attendance is 1,000 or more?
These are the three dates for which they need to order parking.
Filters are a fast way to display only the data you want to see.
Box t ickets for you! Thanks to your diligent efforts, the convention center knows when it’s going to need to order more parking.
You’ve saved the convention center money and made spectators happy.
And that is the point, right? If all you wanted to do was simple calculation, you’d be fine.
But those complicated formulas can get unwieldyespecially ones written by other people, which can be almost impossible to decipher.
If only I had seen where this formula was taking us—downhill fast—I might have chosen a different one....
Should you buy a house or rent? It’s a perennial question.
Both options have good reasons in their favor, and deciding which one is right for you is an important analytical project.
You need to develop a model to compare the cost of  both options.
You and your better half want to move in five years, which in some cases would be enough time to make financial sense for buying a house, but in some cases would not.
Your choice will have big financial consequences in your life!
Let’s run some basic numbers to see what sort of house you’d be able to afford if you did purchase a home.
Use the PV (present value) function to calculate how much money you can borrow.
Take a look at the Help files under the PV function.
Using what you’ve learned about the PV function, implement it using the following assumptions about the hypothetical loan you want to take out.
What other information do you need to compare buying a house versus renting?
You just looked into the Excel Help files to learn about the PV function, and then you implemented it to calculate how large of a mortgage you could afford.
Take a look at the Help files under the PV function.
Using what you’ve learned about the PV function, implement it using the following assumptions about the hypothetical loan you want to take out.
In this case, you expect to pay $1,500 every month.
Here’s the total number of months in your 30-year loan.
How would you compare the costs of renting and buying over time?
What other information do you need to compare housing versus rent?
Plus, I need to compare all those figures with some assumptions about what.
Your interest rate and loan term is in years, but your payment is monthly.
You need to convert the rate and term to months, so you’re using the same unit.
This is how much you can borrow, given your assumptions.
Use Net Present Value to discount future costs to today’s values.
You can use the NPV function to calculate the Net Present Value of  the costs of  your two options.
Whichever option costs less, given your assumptions, is the one you want to pursue.
Now imagine you’re the one paying the interest rather than your bank.
If you add up all your future renting and buying costs discounted using NPV, you have a basis for comparing the two.
The rate is the discount rate, which could be a bunch of different values depending on what you are modeling.
The values are the stream of cash flows that you want to discount.
Here is an example of how your annual cash flows might look for renting an apartment and paying a mortgage.
Your task is to get the NPV of these two streams of costs.
This is the annual total amount you spend on rent.
Type these values into a spreadsheet, then get the NPV of each of these streams of cash.
These values are all annual, so you don’t have to convert to monthly payments here.
You just used NPV to compare renting and a mortgage under two sample scenarios.
You can use the same formula for both of these cells.
Your NPV is correct, but you need a more complex model.
How do you think this spreadsheet works? Take a close look at the formulas.
This spreadsheet contains a much larger array of  assumptions about how your calculation will work.
And this is promising, since the world is complex and it’s a good idea to think through all the variables in such an important decision.
Models in Excel can get complicated You can define models in a number of  ways, depending on what you’re trying to do, but in Excel a “model” is a network of  formulas designed to answer a question.
Models can get complicated, and it can be hard to sort them all out.
Unless you can understand the workings of  this particular model, how do you trust the real estate broker?
The rent model is like the mortgage model in that its spreadsheet representation consists of  cells full of data that flow into formulas, which flow into more formulas.
The model the broker uses is exactly the same calculation as the one you created to evaluate rent, although the specific assumptions she feeds into her model are slightly different from the ones you used.
This spreadsheet shows models for calculating rent and mortgage NPVs.
The mortgage model is a lot more complicated than the rent model.
Take a look at all the variables that her model incorporates.
Wouldn't it be dreamy if Excel could show model relationships graphically, so I don’t have to imagine this complex data flow? But I know it's just a fantasy…
There are a whole lot of variables feeding into the mortgage model.
Formula audit ing shows you the locat ion of your formula’s arguments Formula auditing is an Excel feature that allows you to trace the flow of  data through complex formulas.
Here are the models you saw on the previous page, with arrows drawn by Excel.
These arrows show how data feeds through formulas into the rent/buy formula.
The formula auditing buttons can be found under the formula tab.
Click Remove Arrows to get rid of arrows you’ve created.
This network of  arrows looks complicated, and it is—the model is complicated!
Put your cursor on cell B29, and then click Trace Precedents until you see this grid.
Let’s take a close look at the rent model to see how its formulas work....
This formula takes data from other formulas in the rent box, and you want to use formula auditing to see how those formulas work together.
Click Trace Precedents on cell B11 and on the formulas that feed into it.
Describe in words how the rent formulas flow information through the spreadsheet.
This formula calculates the present value of five years of rent costs.
Were you able to use formula auditing to figure out how the rent model works?
Describe in words how the rent formulas flow information through the spreadsheet.
It points to the cash flows from the Annual Rent.
As for the Annual Rent formula, Year 1 is the.
The rent NPV is selected, so the audit will be of this formula.
The NPV formula points to the cash flows in the Annual Rent column…
You figured out my rent formulas, but you shouldn’t worry about the mortgage stuff.
For example, take a look at the payment calculation from cell B20
The more complex the model, the higher the chance for errors.
Good thing you have formula auditing to step through the formula.
Excel’s loan funct ions all use the same basic e lements.
If you know three of these values, you can calculate the other two.
Take a look at the functions with their required arguments.
Excel has a bunch of  financial functions, but the core functions are the ones that calculate loan values, payments, rates, and terms.
The neat thing about these functions is that they take the same arguments—each other —so if  you know a few, you can generally derive the others.
This one calculates the future value of a stream of payments.
This one calculates the amount of a payment.This function calculates the number of periods in a loan or annuity.
We’re going to figure out how these values are filled in the broker’s implementation of PMT.
The PMT formula in the broker ’s spreadsheet calculates your monthly payment.
What about the rest of the real estate broker’s formulas?
When you click Trace Precedents on the mortgage amount calculation, you can see how the formula looks elsewhere on the spreadsheet for the RATE, NPER, and PV amounts.
Use formula auditing to see how the arguments of this formula are filled.
Take a close look at the formulas the broker uses in her mortgage model.
How do they work? Write your answers in the blanks below.
You will need to use both formula auditing and the help screens to decode these formulas.
Use what you’ve learned so far to figure out how the “Tax savings” formula works.1
Do the same for the “Opp cost” and “Appreciation” formulas.2
Write how you think these formulas work in the blanks.
Were you able to use Excel tools to decode the Tax savings, Opp cost, and Appreciate formulas?
The CUMIPMT function calculates the amount of interest paid on a loan (or annuity) between two.
In this formula, CUMIPMT looks at assumptions about the size, interest rate, and.
Use what you’ve learned so far to figure out how the “Tax savings” formula works.1
The Opp cost formula adds together your down payment and your cumulative mortgage payment and.
The Appreciation formula incorporates appreciation from the previous year into its calculation.
Appreciation formula looks at the purchase price of your house and adds an annual rate of return.
Do the same for the “Opp cost” and “Appreciation” formulas.2
Models can get really complicated in Excel, and it always pays to do a sanity check to make sure that the formulas are written correctly and that the numbers that go into them are sensible.
Let’s take a look at how the model works if  you play around with the broker’s assumptions.
It’s easy to create an elaborate spreadsheet that flows data all over the place.
Always make sure you understand the models you use, especially the complex ones.
They’re pretty and complex, but who’s to say that the assumptions that feed into them are actually true?
Here are a couple different scenarios designed to test the broker’s model.
What happens to your decision when you change the model’s assumptions?
What would you ask the real estate broker to help tease out her beliefs about the plausibility of  her assumptions?
You tinkered with some of the assumptions in the broker’s model.
The cost for buying a house goes way up under this circumstance, for two reasons: one, the.
Now the NPV for buying costs is higher than the NPV for renting.
What would you ask the real estate broker to help tease out her beliefs about the plausibility of  her assumptions?
The broker wants to sell the house (wouldn’t you, if you were a broker?), so you should be.
And BTW, the short answer is this…you should buy a house!
It’s really great that you’re thinking through this decision so thoroughly.
Here’s the deal; I can help you with the model but the decision and risk are ultimately yours.
If you feel conservative or speculative in your decision, you need to make sure that you plug in the right assumptions to reflect it.
I’ve been doing a lot of thinking, and I think that we.
I think that we should take out a loan for as little as.
The bank officer called and said that we qualify for a.
And as for the amount we expect the house to.
An email just came through from your better half talking about the assumptions you two should use for your modeling.
And since your purchase of a home is a partnership, you’d better pay attention to those suggestions!
Take these figures and plug them back into your spreadsheet.
Your better half provided you with some model parameters for your rent vs.
Your house was a good investment ! The purchase of  a house is by no means a guaranteed way to make money, but because of  your diligence in modeling your decision to buy the house, you and yours have done quite nicely.
Buying the house has definitely proven to be the better strategy.
All this arcane Excel code I have to write…what ever happened to drawing pictures?
Head First Investments needs charts for its investment report There is a big presentation coming up for Head First Investment’s board of  directors.
They have all the data compiled to show their performance over the last year, but they need some charts to make the data easier to read and understand.
It’s up to you to crank out some attractive charts.
This percentage column shows the allocation—the portion of the portfolio taken up by each investment.
Write your thoughts about the suitability of each chart type in these blanks.
Which chart did you conclude would be the most useful way of representing your company’s portfolio visually?
Create charts using the Insert tab Let’s try creating one of  those pie charts.
Making charts in Excel is easy: just start by clicking on the Insert tab of the Ribbon.
Click here to add your Amount data to the data range.
Click here to tell Excel how to name your categories.
You might need to reposition this chart to see your data better.
Make sure your cursor is outside your data range in a blank cell.
Use the Design and Layout tabs to rework your chart Inserting a chart in Excel is only the beginning.
Once your chart has been created, you’ll always head to the Design and Layout tabs under Chart Tools to change elements in your chart like the titles and formatting.
You just hit the Select Data button under the Design tab to select your data and labels.
Let’s polish up your chart using the Design and Layout tabs.
Using the far-right button on the Design tab, move the chart you created to its own sheet.
It’d be nice if  your labels were actually next to the pie slices rather than in the legend, so let’s get rid of  the legend.
Once you’ve added them, right-click and select Format Data Labels to make sure they refer to the Category Name rather than the Values.
Finally, increase the font size of  all text elements in the chart to make them more readable.
You can change the font size using the Home tab.
Use this button to move the chart to its own sheet.
Add data labels next to the pie slices, making sure they refer to the Category Name rather than the Values.
Increase the font size of  all text elements in the chart.5
You needed to open this window to fix your axis labels.
Now your labels have moved from the legend to the pie slices.
Q: That made sense, but it looks like there are a lot of different options in the chart menus.
If I want to change just one thing, how do I know how to find it?
A: That’s a great question, and there’s a really simple trick.
You can right-click on any of the components on your chart, so if you want to change an element of your chart, you can always just right-click on it to search for the menu item that will change that one thing.
Q: So when all else fails, if I want to change something on my chart, I should right-click and explore the menus?
Q: Are the charts that come with Excel pretty well designed? I mean, if I just go with the defaults, will I generally create pretty attractive, readable charts?
The graphic quality of Excel’s built-in visualizations is greater than it’s ever been.
If you look at the Chart Styles under the Design tab, you can see a neat grid of design variations that you can quickly apply to your data.
The “but” is that no software can ever make your design decisions for you, especially when it comes to charts.
The fact that your chart came built into Excel is not much help if your visualization is not analytically rigorous or useful.
If you have data and a problem that fits the built-in charts nicely, then Excel is probably the tool for you.
If you need to do high-level, hardcore statistical visualizations, you might want to reach for a program like the open source statistical package R.
Q: What you’re telling me is that I have to learn another piece of software?
A: Not necessarily! Recent versions of Excel are more powerful and versatile than ever, and Excel’s features are more than most people need to manage their data.
But it never hurts to be aware of other visualization options, and if you find yourself spending hours and hours trying to force Excel’s charting features to create some chart that it wasn’t designed to make, then you may want to investigate other graphing programs.
Q: Do people do that—use Excel to make charts that the Excel designers never thought to support?
A: A lot of people use Excel to do things that the original designers of spreadsheets never thought to support.
And it’s actually one of the coolest things about how people use Excel: users dream up features, then force Excel to implement them (even in weird ways sometimes), and later Microsoft picks them up and implements them in a user-friendly way.
Come up with creative ways to apply those features to your own problems.
And if you find yourself spending a huge amount of time forcing Excel to solve your problems, consider the features of more fullfledged computer or statistical programming platforms like R or Python.
How do I know which chart to use with my data?
Your client is almost certainly going to need you to create more charts for the big presentation.…
Your pie chart isn’t going over well with the corporate graphic art ist.
This is a common critique of  pie charts among people who care a lot about data visualizations, so you should probably try a different chart.
But no worries: changing the chart type is a snap.
Your pie chart has been passed around, and some guy you’ve never even dealt with is weighing in with a negative opinion.
This argument makes sense to me, although I’m annoyed that we’re dealing with this.
Which chart do you think would be an improvement over the pie chart?
Lets you plot two variables with the option of  fitting a curve to the data points.
A way to plot financial instruments, showing high, low, and closing prices.
A visualization that lets you add a third dimension of  area to a scatterplot.
Lets you plot two variables with the option of  fitting a curve to the data points.
A way to plot financial instruments, showing high, low, and closing prices.
A visualization that lets you add a third dimension of  area to a scatterplot.
Which chart do you think would be an improvement over the pie chart?
Now that you’ve decided to change your pie chart to a bar chart, go ahead and make that change.
Do the labels update correctly? You might need to adjust the fonts.
You just changed your pie chart to a bar chart.
You might need to change the fonts to make sure everything is in proportion.
Put your cursor inside your data range, and Excel will try to figure out which columns represent your data.
And I think it’s time for you to take on a bigger project.
Compare these two stocks in our portfolio using a time series line chart.
You just created a time chart to compare two stocks.
It appears that Excel created the visualization correctly, but there’s a problem.
Write a formula to show a percentage change from Day 1 for each subsequent day.
Format the columns as percentages to the hundredth decimal place.
For the second period, enter a formula that calculates the percentage change of the S&P from the first period.
Sometimes you need to transform the data in order to graph it effectively.
Creating effective graphics isn’t just about using the graphical manipulation features of Excel effectively.
It’s also about making sure that your data is prepped correctly for a good visualization.
Maybe you can transform the data so they start from the same basis.
You could write formulas that show the percentage change from a baseline.
You just transformed your data to show a percentage change from a zero basis rather than the original value.
Now that you’ve written a formula to show the percentage change for one unit of time, copy and paste the formula for all dates.
You’ll need to add absolute references to make this formula copy correctly.
Hint: You might have to go back into the menu that tells Excel which data to select.
You want Excel to select only your new data, not all four columns.
Head back over to the Insert tab to select the chart you want to create.
You just copied and pasted your new data transformation functions, and then you graphed them.
Now it’s easier to tell how the stocks performed relative to each other.
The board is a cantankerous bunch, and we need to make sure our data visualizations display the utmost professionalism.
You’re start ing to get t ight on t ime…
Put the legend, which is currently on the right, at the bottom of  the chart.
The date labels on the y-axis are kind of  verbose and also get in the way of  the lines.
Put the legend, which is currently on the right, at the bottom of  the chart.
The date labels on the y-axis are kind of  verbose and also get in the way of  the lines.
Select the “M” data format for the y-axis labels to show the first letter of the month’s name.
Set the axis labels to “Low” to put them at the bottom.
The major units of the y-axis are fixed at 1 month.
Your report was a big success… The two charts you created were a big hit among the board of  directors.
You made the data accessible and elegant through your graphical visualizations.
I said, no, I won’t invest in your silly “aeroplanes.” People love boats, they want to travel in boats, so I.
Should your fr iend Betty advert ise? Betty sells the best baguettes in Dataville.
But in spite of  her renown, she is interested in expanding her business through advertising.
She’d like to add more customers to her already stable customer base.
Would advertising be worthwhile? She’s enlisted you for help, and if  your recommendations pay off, your baguettes will be on the house.
You’re going to use this spreadsheet as the basis for your projections about advertising costs and revenue.
Rework this spreadsheet to accommodate blanks for ad costs and revenue from baguettes sold to new customers.
You need to update this formula to accommodate the number of new customer baguettes sold.
This formula multiplies the price by the number of baguettes sold.
Your “Sold to new customers” blank should go somewhere in here.
Right-click on the row numbers to insert a new row.
Just make up dummy numbers to fill in the new blanks.
Update this formula to incorporate the costs from your advertising.
You just modified Betty’s spreadsheet to incorporate figures for new customers and ad costs.
Now we just need to replace those placeholders with reasonable assumptions.…
Betty has project ions of best and worst cases for different ad conf igurat ions.
OK, it costs me $100 to advertise in a magazine.
In the best case, I’ll pick up 200 new customers.
Let’s take one of  those configurations and see how it affects net income.
What does the spreadsheet say about the best case for magazine advertising?
Use your spreadsheet model to implement the best case for magazine advertising.
Betty has already done some thinking about the best- and worst-case scenarios for both TV and magazine advertising.
Here are what she takes to be the parameters of  her decision.
Betty has projected bestand worst-case scenarios for TV and magazines.
You just looked at the best-case scenario for magazine advertising.
Does it show any sort of advantage over the status quo?
Betty thinks that the best case would mean 200 new customers.
Now you’ll have to check out the other three scenarios.
You need to evaluate all her scenarios Possible situations after ads.
Wouldn't it be dreamy if we could elegantly and easily manage these scenarios inside Excel? But I know it's just a fantasy....
The best-case scenario for magazine advertising looks good, but is it the best? And what about the worst-case scenarios? In order to make this assessment, you’re going to need to look at all of her projected possibilities.
Scenarios helps you keep track of different inputs to the same model When you refined Betty’s cash flow model to accommodate an ad expense and the revenue that results from that advertising, you enhanced the model she was using to understand her business.
Having the model is one thing, and getting the inputs correct is another.
You tried one set of inputs, but what about the other three? Scenarios is a feature in Excel that helps you keep track of all your different sets of  model inputs.
Her projections show certain input elements to change, depending on different outcomes.
There are a bunch of inputs that can fill in these values.
Those various inputs all have an effect on this final output.
Scenarios saves different conf igurat ions of the e lements that change.
Implement each one of Betty’s configurations using the Scenarios feature.
To take the Scenarios feature for a spin, first you need to have your network of  formulas (your model) set up.
Next, head over to the What If  Analysis button under the Data tab.
Click on Scenario Manager…, which takes you to this dialog box.
Here you can name each of  your scenarios and specify which cells change and what the values are for those cells in each scenario.
Here’s the dialog box you see when you press the Add… button.
The cells you want to change are the ones you added to Betty’s model.
Here is what she sees as possible new customer counts for each medium.
You just used Scenarios to implement each of Betty’s four projected outcomes for her advertising investment.
These scenarios show net income projections for different ad cost and customer count increases resulting from the ad.
But what are they? With the other four, she gave you the inputs.
But now you need to do a calculation to find out how many new customers are needed to recoup her costs for TV and magazine ads.
Create a new cell in your spreadsheet called “Return on ad,” and fill this cell with a formula that subtracts your ad cost from your new customer revenue.
If this value is equal to zero, you’re at the breakeven point for that type of advertising.
I gave you projections, but now tell me what my breakeven points are for each ad configuration.
In other words, how many baguettes do I need to sell in order to recoup my investment on both TV and magazine ads?
Goal Seek opt imizes a value by trying a bunch of different candidate values With your formula to calculate the amount of  new money Betty brings in on top of  the costs of  her advertising, you’re in a position to try to figure out the key variable you don’t know: the number of  new customers she needs to break even.
The question for breakeven is how many new customers set this value to zero.
You need to try a bunch of options in this cell…
Find the breakeven new-customer count for TV and magazine ads.
Its formula should be the amount of  income from new customers minus the cost of  the ad.
Goal Seek operates by trying a whole bunch of  different values in one cell in order to get a formula in another cell to be equal to the value you want.
In this case, you need Goal Seek to try a bunch of  different values in your New Customers cell to figure out which one makes your return equal to zero.
To take Goal Seek for a spin, just hit the menu item under your Scenario Manager on the Data tab.
Options to try out Excel submits a long list of candidate values.
You just ran Goal Seek to figure out the breakeven points for both TV and magazine advertising.
Here’s how the Goal Seek dialog box should be filled out.
Here’s how your Scenario Manager should look with your two new scenarios.
Q: I’m wondering about the distinction here between “new customers” and “baguettes.” What if you have one new customer who buys 50 baguettes? And what if your current customers buy more baguettes as a result of the advertising?
The model we have right now assumes that each customer buys one baguette.
Q: So why not change the model to incorporate these details?
A: You could absolutely do that, and the question for you as an analyst is whether making your model that much more complex is worth the trouble.
Q: It doesn’t seem like it’d be that much trouble.
A: It might not be that much trouble to incorporate the details you just mentioned, but there are many other details to reality that also are not incorporated into the model.
If you think you should make your model more complex, you need to distinguish between the issues that affect your goals and those that do not.
Q: Sounds like the model itself is really important to get right.
We’re assuming that Betty’s model and our modifications to it have been accurate enough.
When you create your own models, you’ll need to be really careful to make sure that you incorporate all the relevant variables, that those variables are all linked by the right formulas, and that the values you have for those variables are reasonable.
Q: Goal Seek seems like a nice feature, but it seems like there are other ways of making the same calculation.
A: Oh yeah? Q: I think I could probably just create more formulas—maybe an ancillary model—to make the calculation we just did.
Goal Seek is not the most powerful tool for optimization in Excel.
You could certainly write formulas to calculate what you just found about the breakeven points for magazine and TV advertising.
Q: I could even write a couple of algebra equations and figure it out.
The reason you’d use Goal Seek, though, is because it’s fast and easy.
Even once you learn more powerful tools, you’ll still use Goal Seek just because it’s so handy.
The dialog box only has three places for you to enter information.
Q: Does Goal Seek always get the right answer? A: If there is a single correct answer, Goal Seek can find it.
But there’s not always an answer to the question you’re asking, and it just depends on the formulas in your model.
Q: What if I don’t want to set a value to a specific number, I just want to get it as high as it’ll go? Like with the Return, for example.
A: Goal Seek is really all about setting a single formula to a single value by modifying a single cell.
What if I have more than one variable that I want to mess around with?
A: If that’s your problem, it sounds like you need a more powerful tool.
Q: OK, you said that Goal Seek isn’t the most powerful tool for optimization in Excel.
We’re still trying to maximize our net income by looking at the best- and worst-case scenarios for new customers.
Goals Seek sets the output on one formula to one value by changing one cell.
But you need to be able to do more, since her problem needs you to…
She needs you to do t wo things Goal Seek cannot do.
Now you have both new customers and baguette prices to account for as you project net income.
The model is actually too simple: I can change the price of my baguettes, which has an effect on sales.
Your work convinced me to go with the TV ads over the magazine ads.
Solver can handle much more complex opt imizat ion problems The gold standard for optimization inside Excel is the powerful add-on utility Solver.
It comes as an optional installation in every copy of  Excel for Windows.
In an optimization problem, you have a target cell you want to maximize, minimize, or set to a value by changing other cells that may be subject to constraints.
We’d like to maximize our net income for television advertising.
This is the cell that contains the value you want to maximize.
Solver will try a number of  different values for these cells in order to maximize your target cell.
Head over to Appendix ii to see how to get Solver up and running.
Max and Min are options you don’t have inside Goal Seek.
You want to change both the number of possible new customers and the price of the baguettes.
To get Solver started, head over to the far-right corner of  the Data tab on the Ribbon.
You just set up the first part of your Solver optimization.
This is the cell that contains the value you want to maximize.
Solver will try a number of  different values for these cells in order to maximize your target cell.
How much net income can Betty hope to get if she uses television advertising?
What does Solver say to you? Write your answer below.
If you don’t set an upper bound for your New customers, Solver will take it up to infinity.
Solver takes both of the cells we said could change and sets them.
What does Solver say to you? Write your answer below.
Both of these values are as high as they can go.
In the real world, you can’t just raise your prices without anyone noticing.
Your models somehow needs to recognize that other variables may be changed by a change in the price of  baguettes.
How might a change in the price of baguettes affect other variables in the model?
It assumes that changing the price won’t affect anything else in the model.
Do a sanity check on your Solver model Solver will give you optimal answers, provided that your model is correct.
But it doesn’t know whether your model is based in reality.
You always need to check your formulas to make sure your model corresponds to reality correctly.
You need this variable to be a formula rather than a constant value.
If this value is a formula, it can change in response to fluctuations in baguette price.
Write the formula to incorporate this equation into your model.
Its output is the “y”, the number sold to regulars.
I commissioned an economist’s report to find out the relationship between.
Looks like Betty shelled out the big bucks and had an economist create an equation to describe the relationship between the cost of baguettes and the amount sold to regulars.
This sort of  thing just screams to be made into an Excel formula.
You just entered a new formula to calculate the number of regulars who’ll buy Betty’s baguettes in light of the price of those baguettes.
The “x” in the formula is replaced by a reference to cell B3
There must be a big dropoff by the time she hits $6, because the equation returns a negative customer count here.
This is not an encouraging net income figure, but maybe Solver will come up with a scenario that predicts better results.
If Excel switched to Currency formatting when you wrote the formula, switch this cell back to General formatting.
Since you’ve set it up already, you won’t have to make any sort of  modifications to your target cells, constraints, or any other element of  the optimization problem.
The change you made is in the model itself, so Solver will just try to maximize your profits like it did previously, but this time with a slightly different model.
Now you just have to rerun Solver and you’ll have your.
Solver calculated your project ions When you reran Solver, it used the same assumptions you gave it previously, but this time the formula outputs were all different because you added a formula to provide a better prediction of  the number of  regulars who would buy baguettes at whatever price Solver thinks is best.
Solver thinks Betty should bring her price down to $4, which will optimize her regular customer purchases, but not any further down, which could hurt her revenue.
This configuration represents a final best-case scenario for TV advertisement.
You can name this set of outputs as a scenario if you like.
This is a significant projected increase in the number of regular customers.
The public reaction to her TV advertisements appears overwhelmingly positive.
All sorts of new clients are lining up for Betty’s baguettes!
Excel loves your numbers, but it can also handle your text.
It contains a suite of functions designed to enable you to manipulate text data.
A lot of times, you’ll receive data that isn’t at all in the format you.
Your database of analyt ic customers just crashed! Lightning smashed into your office and wiped out all your hard drives, including your customer database.
The guy in charge of  backups forgot to do them (he sends his apologies)
Fortunately, you have something you might be able to use.
Word is, a garbled scrap of  email sent a few days ago might have salvageable information about your contacts.…
Uh, I tore this thing up and still could not make it work.
How am I going to deal with our clients if I don’t know who they are?
All the information appears to be in one column of the spreadsheet.
Plus, instead of dashes inside the phone numbers, there are asterisks.
This data would be usable if it were just broken into columns.
Your messy data is all mashed together in the same column.
How do you separate the good data from the garbage?
That email has your client list, all right, but the list isn’t looking so hot.
One of  your employees loaded it and saved it to an Excel file for you.…
What feature of Excel do you think would break this data into multiple columns?
Text to Columns uses a de limiter to split up your data.
Click Finish to skip step 3 of the Wizard, which is about number formatting.
Text to Columns is a great feature that lets you split your data into columns using a delimiter, which is simply a text character that signifies the breaks between the different data points.
If  your delimiter is, say, a period, Text to Columns will put the data to the left of  the period in one column, the data to the right in another, and then it’ll delete the period.
If  you have more than one type of  delimiter, you might have to run Text to Columns more than once.
In this case, you have a period acting as a delimiter, as well as a comma, and you could even treat those weird “s” characters as delimiters, which would make Excel throw them out.
The format is so common that when you load a CSV file, Excel automatically splits the data into columns using the comma delimiter.
If your data points are arranged in columns with the data separated by spaces, click “Fixed width.”
Try using Text to Columns to fix this messy data.
You’ll probably have to run it a second time to get the period delimiter.
When you specify that “s” is a delimiter, Excel will put a column to the left of them, which you can delete.
Be sure to tell Excel to treat consecutive “s” delimiters as one, because you have a lot of them.
You’ll have to run Text to Columns more than once to get rid of all your delimiters.
You don’t need to treat the asterisk as a delimiter, because the data on the right is a phone number.
Once we’re done splitting the data up, we can fix the uppercase letters and the asterisks in the phone number.
You just used Text to Columns to break your data into multiple pieces.
This is a lot better looking than the messy data you received!
For starters, you need a delimiter, or at least you need the data elements to be evenly spaced.
Here you have neither: the “s” characters aren’t evenly spaced, they aren’t delimiters, and there’s nothing that separates them from the next data element: the last name.
Press Undo a few times to get the data back to its original messy state, and then look up text formulas in Help files.
Better click Undo a couple times to start from scratch.
You’re going to need some more firepower for this problem.
They are actually data! They stand for “stars,” and they’re a ranking of the quality of our customers.
Excel has a suite of funct ions for dealing with text Earlier you used the function VALUE() to convert text data to numbers, but VALUE() is just the beginning of  Excel’s text functions.
Excel has a whole suite of  functions to deal with all sorts of  situations in which you need to change or query text data.
You’re going to use a few of  these to clean up this database, and in the future when you have text problems that Text to Columns can’t solve, you should check out the Help files for other function-based solutions.
Click here to get to the reference on text functions.
Removes duplicate spaces and spaces on each end of  text in a cell.
Returns a value equal to two or more text cells mashed together.
Returns a number that represents the position of  a search string in a cell.
Which functions would you use to extract the “s” characters and the phone numbers from your messy data?
Removes duplicate spaces and spaces on each end of  text in a cell.
Returns a value equal to two or more text cells mashed together.
Returns a number that represents the position of  a search string in a cell.
You were to match each Excel text function to what it does.
Which functions would you use to extract the “s” characters and the phone numbers from your messy data?
We want to use LEFT() and RIGHT() to extract our “s” characters and phone numbers.
This has the text or cell reference where you want to extract characters.
This is a value or formula saying how many characters to grab.
You’ll put a formula with this function in a new cell, and the formula will point to your original raw data and say how many characters to grab.
Use RIGHT() to extract the phone numbers and display them in a different cell.
Once you’ve done the first record, copy and paste the formula for each row.
You need to extract characters on the left side of  your cells (the “s” characters) and on the right side of  your cells (the phone numbers)
To do this, you can use the LEFT() and RIGHT() functions.
For the second argument of your formula, type the number of text characters to extract.
Once you’ve done the first record, copy and paste the formula for the remaining records.
For the first argument, point a reference to cell A1
You just used the text function RIGHT() to extract phone numbers from your raw data.
Were you able to get what you needed out of the mess?
The raw data remains untouched, since your formula is returning cleaned-up data to a new location.
In the RIGHT() formula you used to extract phone numbers, you told Excel to extract 12 characters, which works for all the phone numbers.
But the count of  “s” characters varies among the cells—from one character to five.
You need to vary the values that go into the second argument.
So when you create a LEFT() formula to extract the “s” characters, the value of  your second argument somehow needs to vary among the cells.
Create column headings, because you’re about to have a number of columns.
Right-click on the 1 button to the left of  the first row, and tell Excel to insert a row.
This will mostly group together records that have a similar number of  “s” characters.
In column C, type the number of  “s” characters in each row.
Since similar records will be grouped together, you should be able to copy and paste.
Finally, in column D, create the LEFT() formula that will return the “s” characters.
Have your second argument refer to the number you just created in column C.
Be sure to add column headers in your new row.
Sort your data and type the number of “s” characters in this column.
You just created a column full of numbers representing the “s” character count in each cell.
Then you created a LEFT() formula using that number to extract the characters from your raw data.
It’s easy to copy and paste the Star Count values as you write them.
This column shows the number of stars in each row of your data.
Now you have two data elements from your raw, messy data extracted!
Business is start ing to suffer for lack of customer data.
Let’s use the stars and phone fields to whittle down the original.
That way, breaking apart the last name and first name will be easier.
If you had a formula that told you the length of things…
That data you’re working on is really important, and without it your employees are starting to have problems.
Better punch through those first and last names really quickly!
You know, because you already extracted values on both ends of  your raw data, it’d be nice if  you could use that information to get the name out.
It’d be nice if  you could use the data you’ve extracted to trim the ends off  of  your raw data.
Hate to bug you about this, but I need our customer data! Right now, I can’t get in touch with anyone, which is seriously hurting business!
In the first column, you’ll peel the phone number out of  the original data.
In the second column, you’ll peel the stars out of  the original data.
You’re going to use these columns to clean up your name data.
Write a function that takes the leftmost characters out of  the original data.
How many characters? An amount equal to the length of  the original data minus the length of  the phone number.
The second argument of  your LEFT() formula should contain another formula that makes this calculation.
Now write a function that takes the rightmost characters out of  your new value.
How many? An amount equal to the length of  your new value minus the length of  your star value.
You just wrote formulas to extract the names from your raw data.
This is the number of characters in the cell minus the length of the phone number.
This value is equal to the number of characters in cell E2 minus the length of the “s” character element.
Now you have an almost-clean value consisting of the customer name!
Here is your raw data with the phone number element removed.
The spreadsheet is getting complex, but we’re making lots of  progress.
Go ahead and copy/paste the two formulas you just created for the remaining rows in your spreadsheet.
You need a way to extract the last name from the data you created in column D.
It seems clear that you can use a LEFT() formula, but you need to create another formula-based argument to specify the number of  characters to grab.
You need a formula that will state the numerical position of  the comma.
When you use it as your argument, your LEFT() formula will know just how many characters to grab to return the last name.
What formula will state the numerical position of the comma?
These are intermediary values you’ve created to clean your data.
Why would you need a function like this? Well, for starters, you could use it in conjunction with a LEFT() or RIGHT() formula to extract a number of  characters that varies from formula to formula.
FIND() is a function that returns a number that states where a search string can be found within a piece of  text.
Say you were looking for the position of  the text “x” in the expression “Head First Excel”
This argument has the text (or a reference to the text) that contains what you’re looking for.
Excel looks at each character in the cell and tells you where it finds the first instance of the search text.
Each character in the cell has a number associated with it.
Use FIND() inside your LEFT() formula to specify the position of the comma, telling LEFT() how many characters to grab to return your Last Name value.
Combine LEFT() and FIND() into a formula that extracts last names from column F.
Make your FIND() expression the second argument of your LEFT() formula.
You might need to add or subtract a character, so that you don’t actually include the comma in your Last Name field.
You just combined two formulas to get your Last Name field.
All you have to do is subtract 1 from the value of your FIND() formula, and your comma is excluded.
This formula searches for the comma, and it returns the last name…
That LEFT/FIND formula is cool and everything, but wouldn’t it be easier in this case just to use Text to Columns? We have a simple delimiter here, why not use it?
Can you run Text to Columns on column Messy 2? What happens when you try?
Q: Wouldn’t Text to Columns be an easier way to deal with this problem?
Q: So why didn’t we? A: Whether and when you use Text to Columns versus formulas is really a personal preference, and there is nothing wrong with using it here.
But there is one big, fat reason to use formulas primarily.
Q: Because it’s the harder way, so it’s easier to show off?
A: Not at all! You’d always want to use formulas in situations where you think you might want to go back and trace exactly how your clean data was derived from your messy data.
Q: Why would you care? As long as the clean data works correctly, aren’t you in good shape?
A: If you have messy data that has a single, simple pattern to it, you probably wouldn’t have to go back and see how you derived your clean data.
If every data point is separated by a delimiter, and you run a Text to Columns, you probably won’t have problems with your cleaned data not squaring with your original data.
Q: But if the original data is complicated, it’s a different story.
The customer data you salvaged from the email has several patterns to the messiness: the first two fields (stars and names) aren’t separated by a delimiter, the last name and the first name are separated by a comma, the first name and the phone number are separated by a period, and don’t forget the asterisks inside the phone number.
A: And because it’s so messy, you’ve had to do a bunch of things to fix it.
In creating the big, formula-filled spreadsheet you used to clean the data, you’ve also set up an audit that you can review if your clean data doesn’t match your messy data perfectly later on.
Q: But there are still a lot of cases where I need to use Text to Columns, right?
Cleaning messy data—which all of us have to do at one point or anotheris about finding the boundary conditions between your individual data points.
If it’s not a comma or a period, it might be spaces.
So most of the field of cleaning messy data involves identifying those boundary conditions and making the software split the data using them.
And if you run it over and over, Text to Columns can usually make some pretty complicated breaks.
Just remember that you sacrifice the ability to go back and tweak the formulas you used to get different results.
Once you run Text to Columns on data, it deletes the original data and leaves you with new columns.
Q: I think that on the first name, which is the last data field we have, we’re safe to go with Text to Columns.
By now, all the formulaic work we’ve done to break up the original mess has made what’s left pretty simple.
A: Then go right ahead and use Text to Columns!
Text to Columns sees your formulas, not the ir results.
There’s a little snag when it comes to running this operation on the data you created in the Messy 2 column:
Text to Columns does what it says it does: take text and break it into columns.
But here Excel wants to treat your formulas as text.
This won’t work: you need to take the formulas and render them as values.
Paste Special is a fantastically helpful operation in Excel that lets you copy something and then—rather than paste an exact copy of  the original—paste a modification of  the original.
You can use Paste Special to paste the values that the formulas you’ve copied return, rather than the formulas themselves.
And that is just what you need to do with your Messy 2 column data.
Text to Columns is trying to break up this text!
It’s looking at your formulas, not the results of those formulas, which is what you want.
Do this and then run Text to Columns to break your first and last names apart while getting rid of the comma and period.
Put your cursor here and choose Paste Special > Values.
You just ran Paste Special > Values to make your data ready for the Text to Columns operation.
Text to Columns has no problem reading your data this time around.
Tell the dialog box to use the commas and the periods.
You’ve successfully extracted all your data from the original mess, but in order for your employee to use your work, you’ll need a perfectly clean version.
You know, could I get that data? I know fixing it up is a pain, but I’m starting to get angry phone calls from customers who are wondering whether we’ve forgotten them.
There’s still time to patch things up with everyone, but not much.
Use the PROPER() function to make your names look like This rather than THIS.
Look up the function in Help if  you need to learn how to use it.
Use the SUBSTITUTE() function, looking it up in Help if  you need to.
Delete the columns you no longer need from your new sheet.4
You just went through the final steps to fix your data so that your employee can use it.
Use the PROPER() function to make your names look like This rather than THIS.
Look up the function in help if  you need to learn how to use it.
Use the SUBSTITUTE() function, looking it up in Help if  you need to.
You can copy and paste this formula for all the name values.
The second and third arguments are what you want to replace and what you want to replace it with.
Delete the columns you no longer need from your new sheet.4
Your data crisis is solved! This chapter started off  with a real mess: you received a pile of jumbled-up data, which was all you had left of  your customer database.
But with the help of Excel’s powerful text formulas, you fixed that messy data right up.
But what are they? And why should we care? For Excel newbies, pivot tables can also be.
By the time you finish this chapter, you’ll be slicing and dicing your data in Excel.
But everything rides on the boxes I put it in.
Head First Automotive Weekly needs an analysis for the ir annual car rev iew issue Head First Automotive Weekly has signed you on to help them create some table visualizations out of  their annual car test data.
The magazine’s readers are serious data junkies ; they just love looking at stats on all the cars available.
On the one hand, it’s great that you have such passionate readers, but on the other hand, it’s kind of  a drag that you have to slice and dice the car data in so many ways in order to satisfy them.
This is going to be a big project, so you’d better brew up a pot of Starbuzz coffee.
I need you to summarize, slice, and dice the car data in every way you can.
The editor has just given you a pretty broad request.
Using the fields in your data, come up with four ways you might group and summarize the MPG (miles per gallon) information.
Describe some of the steps you’d have to undertake to implement these summaries using formulas.
How long do you think it would take to do all this?
You just brainstormed a bunch of ways to summarize the data on the basis of MPG.
Describe some of the steps you’d have to undertake to implement these summaries using formulas.
How long do you think it would take to do all this?
You’ve been asked to do a lot of repet it i ve operat ions There is complexity in these data summaries that you’ve envisioned.
You can slice the data in a million different ways, and it could take forever.
These summaries basically have you doing the same sort of  operation over and over again: applying formulas to various groups and subgroups of  data.
There are a bunch of different combinations to your groupings…
Wouldn't it be dreamy if I could do all these operations more quickly? But I know it's just a fantasy....
Pivot tables are an incredibly powerful tool for summarizing data How do you group data in a bunch of different ways and summarize the groupings with formulas? The best approach is to use Excel’s pivot tables.
Pivot tables are an extraordinarily powerful feature of  Excel that let you quickly and visually run these operations.
What you want to do is take your data and put the different fields together into a new summary table.
This will show unique values from that field as row elements.
That is the sort of  grouping that takes place in pivot tables.
Each one of these ellipses is a spreadsheet cell with a data point inside.
You want your data fields grouped into each of the boxes in the table.
In the pivot table dialog box, drag a field into the row blank.
Now there are only the unique values from Field 1 in this column.
Finally, pick the quantitative field that you’d like to see summarized and pick the function you want to use.
Generally (but not always), your rows and columns will be categories, and your data blank will be the numerical thing you want to group and summarize by the row and column categories.
Next, you do the same thing for the element you want to represent in your column.
Drag the field name into the column blanks on the pivot table.
Pivot table construct ion is al l about prev isualizing where your f ie lds should go Pivot tables are their own little universe inside Excel, and people get intimidated at first by all the options.
The thing you need to remember is this: stay focused on your analytical objectives, and try to create tables that help you understand your data better.
What table would help you understand your data and fulfill your objectives?
Try out creating your first pivot table from the summary you envisioned in the first exercise of this chapter.
The editor has just given you a pretty broad request.
Using the fields in your data, come up with four ways you might group and summarize the MPG (miles per gallon) information.
Drag fields from the Field List to the column, row, and data blanks.2
Click the “Sum of  MPG” drop box, and change the Value Field Settings so that you’re taking the Average.
Also, tweak the Number Format so that you don’t end up with a bunch of  decimal zeros.
You just created your first pivot table, summarizing average MPG by Make and Type.
Select a cell in your data, and click Insert > Pivot Table.
Drag fields from the Field List to the column, row, and data blanks.
Click the “Sum of  MPG” drop box, and change the Value Field Settings so that you’re taking the Average.
Also, tweak the Number Format so that you don’t end up with a bunch of decimal zeros.
Tell Excel to take the Average of your MPG field.
Drag the field names to the boxes where you want them to be.
We need a different formula here, because the sum of MPG values doesn’t make any sense.
Here’s the window you use to make sure you have the correct data selected.
The pi vot table summarized your data way faster than formulas would have The steps to create a pivot table are pretty simple.
Just select your data and drag your fields where you want them to be.
The steps to create this table using formulas are more complicated.
In order to create the functionality of  a MAXIFS() formula you’d need to write a long array formula, and those are beyond the scope of  this book.
You can copy and paste the column headings and remove duplicates.
But this time after you’re done removing duplicates, you need to copy and Paste Special > Transpose so that you actually have those values on a row.
You’ll need to create a long formula to make sure that your results are grouped correctly.
Q: Where does the word “pivot” come into play? Have we been pivoting the data somehow?
A: You “pivot” the data when you look at it from different angles.
One of the things that pivot tables enable you to do is switch around your data summaries really quickly, so if you wanted to “pivot” your rows and columns literally you’d be able to do it easily.
Q: But what if I just wanted to make groups and summarize them, but not actually pivot the data?
A: Don’t get too hung up on the word “pivot.” If you think of pivot tables as efficient ways to group and summarize, you’ve grasped what they’re all about.
Q: How would I use pivot tables in a workflow for data analysis?
A: They are great for doing exploratory data analysis, where you are looking at data from a bunch of different angles in order to prepare your ideas for the use of more advanced data analysis techniques.
Q: So if there was something in the data I wanted to optimize with Solver, for example, I might knock around inside the data with pivot tables in order to develop my ideas about what I wanted to optimize?
And the reason that pivot tables are good for dealing with data in this way is because they are so fast.
As long as it would take to create the formulas you’d need to create one summary table, you can create a whole mess of pivot tables.
Q: Speaking of formulas, what if I want the speed and flexibility of pivot tables but just want a little scrap of summary data rather than a full-blown table? Got anything for me?
A: There are a bunch of ways to do this.
First, even though you want a piece or two of data, you can still create a pivot table for it.
Just be judicious in your use of grouping and filtering, and you can get the answers you need quickly.
Q: I was thinking more along the lines of a pivot formula.
You’ll need to create a pivot table, but once you have it you can call it from another worksheet using that function.
Q: What else? A: You can also replicate a lot of the functionality of pivot tables using structured references.
The more advanced structured reference syntax enables you to group data in ways you can’t using conventional references.
Yet another reason to deepen your skills as a formula master.
Another question: so I liked the fact that I can use different functions to calculate the “Data” portion of the pivot table.
But what if I want to do something really fancy—say, use a function that compares my data field to some other data field?
Under your field’s settings, click “Show values as…” for some options to compare the data to other fields.
Here’s another question: say I wanted to use pivot tables that aren’t actually in my document.
Excel uses a technology called OLAP (Online Analytical Processing) that enables it to plug into (potentially huge) databases.
This usage of pivot tables is beyond the scope of this book, but using pivot tables to access and evaluate external data is one of the powerful uses of Excel.
A: You know, you’re throwing a lot of questions at pivot tables and seem to be having a hard time stumping the feature.
A: It’s a good idea to use them every time you can, and to stay on the lookout for opportunities to use them.
Chances are, if it’s possible at all to do a task with pivot tables, doing that task with pivot tables is faster than the alternatives.
How does this filtering thing work? With all the power of pivot tables, what does filtering get me?
Filters allow you to take the elements you’ve assigned to your Values box and calculate only the ones that meet your criteria.
Now could you show me the table only for vehicles with reliability equal to 5?
Go back to your pivot table and tell it to show the summary only for highest reliability cars.
This is what your data looked like before you added the filter.
Pivot Table: I must say that I’m delighted to be here.
It’s always such a joy to spread the word about me and what I do.
People need to recognize that there is nothing inside of  Excel that matches my raw analytic power.
Head First: Well, we’re happy you’re here and you’re welcome any time.
But I have to ask, is it true that there is nothing in Excel that matches your analytic power? Actually, let me rephrase the question.
Isn’t the analytic power something the analyst brings to the game, not something you do?
Head First: Just to play devil’s advocate here, are you? It seems that all you can do is group data on two dimensions and run a calculation.
Pivot Table: Two dimensions? You should think bigger than that.
Try dragging more than one field to my column, row, data, and filter blanks.
You can insert as many levels of  dimensionality into your pivot table analysis as you like.
Head First: But wouldn’t that clutter up the spreadsheet big time to have four or five or ten dimensions of  summary?
Pivot Table: I would point you to your previous observation.
It takes a good analyst to do good pivot table-based analysis.
Yes, dragging a whole mess of fields into a pivot table makes the resulting table full of  fields, but if  a user has the analytic chops for it, then creating such a table may be exactly what is in order.
Head First: But there must be something to be said for keeping things simple.
Even the most brilliant analyst is going to have to present results to someone who isn’t a brilliant analyst, so keeping things simple for an audience’s sake is a good idea.
Head First: Well, suppose that brilliant analyst wanted to make a chart rather than a table.
They’d need make to a chart off  the pivot table—they can’t make a pivot chart.
Head First: What if  we want to do some more subtle formatting of  our pivot table? Can we just format the pivot table directly as if  it were a regular spreadsheet?
Pivot Table: You can, but a lot of  people will copy and Paste Special > Values the result of  a pivot table to another sheet and then format the pasted results.
The downside of  that approach is that you lose your formulas.
But the upside of  the approach is that your formatting doesn’t mess up if  you want to change your pivot table to look at another set of  summaries.
Pivot Table: Let’s just say my versatility in processing different types of  data has enabled me to cultivate a certain cosmopolitanism.
Time to wrap this analysis up and execute the pivot tables your client needs.
I can see that this is going to shape up really well.
Here are the tables I’d like to see us have in the magazine for our special car review issue.
Implement the tables that the editor describes on the facing page.
In order to create a presentation, copy and Paste Special > Values each to a new sheet.
Create the data summaries that your client needs using Excel’s pivot tables.
With your new knowledge of pivot tables, you created the tables the Head First Automotive Weekly needed for its review issue.
Implement the tables that the editor describes on the facing page.
In order to create a presentation, copy and Paste Special > Values each to a new sheet.
You can actually put both satisfaction and reliability in the Values box.
Set your number formatting to round off the extra zeros.
It’s fine to use the SUM formula here, since this configuration only displays one value for each row/column combination.
In this case, you need to select the max formula in the Values box.
It helped me figure out which car I wanted to buy.
This baby doesn’t have the best reliability, but man, the stats were right about satisfaction!
Head First Automotive Weekly released a particularly illuminating annual car review this year, all thanks to your well-crafted pivot tables.
They’re called Boolean values, and they’re just plain ol’ TRUE and FALSE.
The values in this spreadsheet are too good to be TRUE....
Are f ishermen behaving on Lake Datavil le? Lake Dataville has so many enthusiastic fishermen that the Dataville government has had to impose limits on fishermen to make sure they don’t take all the fish!
Most fishermen love the rules, because they guarantee the supply of  fish.
But there’s always a handful of  bad apples, and the government needs your help sifting through the catch records to find them.
Here are the regulations that state how many fish different types of boats can catch.
You have data on catch amounts for each boat There’s a complex system for each boat ID.
Each ID tells you whether the boat is small or large and what kind of  fish it catches.
The problem in dealing with this data is that you don’t have cells to tell you the type and size of  each boat.
That information is all mashed up inside the ID cells.
If  that information isn’t broken out of  the ID cell, you’ll never be able to cross-reference each boat with the catch limits.
You need a formula that can tag each boat as small and large, and as bass and trout.
It’d be nice to have a field for each boat that says “Large” or “Small,” and one that says “Bass” or “Trout.”
Here is the number of fish caught by each boat.
If a boat ID has “L” in it, it’s “Large.”
If a boat has neither “L” nor “S,” it’s “Large.”
If  you stick a Boolean expression inside an IF formula, you can have your formula return any value you want instead of  returning TRUE or FALSE.
A Boolean expression is a formula or argument to a formula that returns a value of  TRUE or FALSE.
Here’s a text formula that looks at text substrings…can you think of any use for it?
The results you want go into the second and third arguments.
You can put text, numbers, or even another formula in these arguments.
This formula won’t apply to all the boats, but it’s getting close to what you need.
Head First: I have to say, as simple as the TRUE and FALSE data values are, you’re definitely looking promising as a tool to help with data analysis in Excel.
Boolean: You bet! And you’ve only seen the beginning of  what I can do.
Head First: OK, relax and let’s talk through your features slowly.
The most obvious place to find me is in the category of  logical functions, and IF is one of  those.
But there is also AND, OR, NOT, and a bunch of  others.
Head First: I assume that those three functions are similar to IF in how they work?
But even if  you can’t, don’t worry, because you’ll need them soon enough.
I’ve been looking at that fishing boat problem of  yours, and you’re going to need to throw a lot more Booleans at it to get what you want.
Boolean: I’m in logical functions, but I’m in all sorts of  functions throughout Excel.
A lot of  the time, the third or fourth argument of  a function that’s totally unrelated to the logical functions will take a Boolean expression.
Boolean: The heavy-duty functions in Excel often have a lot of  subtle permutations to how they can run.
So it’s a good idea to put in a Boolean or two so that you tell Excel the specifics of  what you want.
Don’t worry, if  you spend enough time in the Help files, you’ll notice me all over the place.
Head First: So what about the equals sign and the greater-than sign?
So you can use Booleans in a bunch of  ways to compare values.
And you can use IF to return values different from TRUE and FALSE.
What if  I wanted to compare three values rather than two using an IF formula?
This is the sort of question that makes you an Excel power user.
This sort of  thing makes your friends stare in awe at the breadth of  your mastery over spreadsheets.…
Boolean: To compare three things, you nest IF formulas inside each other.
Your IF formulas need to accommodate the complete naming scheme The boats are coded by fish type using a complex logic.
The presence of  one of  five special codes is what determines whether a boat is Trout or Bass.
The problem is that IF doesn’t evaluate five options in order to return one or two answers.
It just looks at one Boolean expression at a time.
So you need to take the complex logic of  boat ID assignments and convert it into a series of  linear decisions.
That way, you’ll be able to write the IF formula that gives you the right answer.
There’s an elaborate logic to whether a boat is Trout or Bass.
This is a linear set of decisions that nested IF formulas will be able to handle.
Pool Puzzle Your job is to take text strings from the.
You may not use the same text string more than once.
Your goal is to make a logical structure that you’ll be able to represent in.
Note: Each thing from the pool can be used only once!
Pool Puzzle Answers You just created a logical diagram to.
Note: Each thing from the pool can be used only once!
Nested IF Magnets Use the logic diagram you created to complete your nested IF formula.
Nested IF Magnets Were you able to create the formula that tags each boat as either Trout or Bass?
The nested elements end, so you put the parentheses at the end of the formula.
Now that you’ve created the formula to tag each boat as being Trout or Bass, it’s time to write another formula that tags each boat as being either Large or Small.
Here’s the formula you used to assign Bass or Trout.
Here’s the naming scheme—a little simpler for size than it is for type.
You just created a formula to assign a size amount to each boat.
If you had nested IF formulas in this exercise like you did in the last one, your formula might look like this.
But you also could have written a simpler formula that looks like this.
Since all small boats are marked “S”, you know that all boats not marked “S” are large.
You won’t be able to use IF for this problem.
You’ll need a formula that counts based on a Boolean expression.
Or rather, a formula that will count based on two expressions, because each boat is part of  two categories, size and type.…
He’s asking you to fill up these cells on your spreadsheet.
Good work! Now are you going to use that data to help us fill out our spreadsheet? We first need to count boats that fall into each category: Large Trout, Small Trout, Large Bass, and Small Bass.
You could, but it’d be easier to use a formula.
Their doc is already laid out and formatted, so you can just fill in the blanks.
If  you created a pivot table, you’d have to Paste Special > Values the results into the regulator’s table anyway.
If  you create a formula in those cells, you’ll be able to check your values, too.
Why not use a pivot table? It seems like it’d be faster and easier.
In the Help files, find the COUNT formula that will count records based on a boat’s type and size.
The COUNT functions are under the category of Statistical functions.
You need a formula that counts based on two conditions: size and type.
Your goal is to count boats that have, for example, both Large and Trout among their values.
Did you find the function that counts based on multiple conditions?
Say you want to count the number of boats that have “Large” and “Trout” in their rows.
It also can count based on single criteria, so it has all the functionality of  COUNTIF and more.
A lot of  Excel users have stopped using COUNTIF altogether because COUNTIFS is so powerful.
Your challenge is to create one formula that you can copy to the other three blanks in your Count of boats table.
Your criteria range will be on this sheet over here.
Use references inside your COUNTIFS formula to point to these criteria values.
You’ll need to use absolute references to hold row, column, and both row and column, depending on the reference.
You just implemented a COUNTIFS formula to count the number of boats in each category.
The formula copies and pastes smoothly for the other three blanks.
If your absolute references are correct, this is what you’ll see.
It’s an absolute reference on row and column, because you don’t want either to shift.
You could do it with about 50 nested IF formulas for each row.
But imagine what that would entail! There must be an easier solution.
There’s got to be a way to break this problem down a little bit.
If you could deal with small chunks of the problem, maybe then you could put it back together.
Here’s the logic you’d need to encode into a big nested IF formula.
Awesome! Now I just need that list of people who’ve violated their catch limits.
Couldn’t you write a Boolean formula or something to tag each boat “Violator” or not?
When working with complex condit ions, break your formula apart into columns You’d have an easier time if  you just created a field for each item that said whether it was in violation of any of  the four categories.
You know that L388SLM isn’t a Bass Large, but as long as your formula returns TRUE only for the category Trout Large if  it’s in violation, you can ignore the FALSE values in the other columns.
Then you can write a formula in column I that returns TRUE of  one of  the cells in columns E through H are TRUE.
Excel ninjas are always thinking about how to solve complex problems in multiple simple steps.
You want a formula here that returns TRUE if L388SLM is “Trout Large” and in violation.
It’d be nice if you could copy and paste the same formula for all these other cells.
That way, one of the values in columns E through H will be TRUE if the boat is in violation.
Create a formula that returns TRUE if a boat matches one of the labels in E1:H1 and is in excess of the corresponding catch limit.
You’re going to use the AND function in this case, which takes a series of  Boolean expressions and returns TRUE only if  all those expressions individually evaluate to TRUE.
Take a look at AND in the help screens if you need more information.
The first one is partially done for you below, but you’ll have to add dollar signs to create absolute references.
Plus, the maximum catch amount is going to change for each of  the four cells.
Be sure to change the references to make them absolute, where necessary.
This expression evaluates to “Trout Large.”The ampersand here combines two text strings together, like.
Copy and paste your formula for all the cells in these columns.
You just created formulas to evaluate whether each boat is in violation of any of the categories.
There are lots of FALSE values, but we’re looking for needles in a haystack here, since there aren’t a whole lot of violators.
Here’s where the absolute reference dollar signs go for the formula in E2
For the other three columns, you just need to change the reference to the catch limit.
This formula shows that it’s FALSE that 381-T is both “Bass Small” boat and in violation of the Bass Small catch limit.
Combine the values for each boat using a single formula that says whether the boat is a violator.
Create the formula that will combine the Boolean values in columns E through H for each boat.
That will tell you once and for all whether the boat is a violator.
Using the Help files, look up the logical function that takes a range of Booleans and returns TRUE if  one or more of  them is correct.
Make your filter display only rows where the value in column I is TRUE.
One of these functions returns TRUE if one or more of its arguments is TRUE.
You just created formulas that return TRUE if the boat is a violator.
Using the Help files, look up the logical function that takes a range of Booleans and returns TRUE if  one or more of  them is correct.
This formula returns TRUE if one of its arguments is TRUE.
You can write the formula in one of two ways.
If you want to get real fancy, you can nest AND, OR, and IF functions all inside each other.
Make your filter display only rows where the value in column I is TRUE.
There aren’t many violators, but these folks are definitely catching too much!
The fishes of Dataville (not to mention the environment that depends on them) will thank you....
Just ice for f ishies! Using your analysis, violators were brought to justice.
They paid a fine and promised not to take more than their share again.
As a result, the ecology of  Lake Dataville is in tip-top shape, with stable populations of  very happy fish.
You’ve developed a formidable knowledge of Excel in the past 13 chapters, and by now.
In this final chapter, you’ll use lookup functions along with some of the tools you already.
You are with a watchdog that needs to tally budget money Geopolitical Grunts is a swashbuckling group of  policy geeks who advise businesses and governments on the most important macro trends of  the day.
They need your help doing some hardcore pivot table work.
Thanks for coming aboard! I’ve got some beastly data here that I just can’t make work for me.
I know it has the information we need, I just don’t know how to draw it out.
It describes how much each agency spends per household on average.
Problem is, we don’t have the data for this graphic.
We don’t have the per household spending, and we don’t have our geography broken into these regional divisions.
Anyhow, if you can somehow make that data into the data to create this chart, that would be great.
The folks at Geopolitical Grunts sent you this database, which is a county-by-county summary of  U.S.
And because it’s almost 50,000 lines, you might want to close other programs before loading it!
Can you create it from the data you have? Why or why not?
Look at both axes of this chart and say whether you can create those axes from the database you have.
You just compared the data to the chart you’ve been asked to generate.
The data says county/state, but the chart they want says region.
You can probably calculate per household spending from these data points.
Go ahead and create the field you need: the spending per household for each agency in each county.
Data can be close to what you want without ever quite getting there.
But that doesn’t mean that you can’t do your analysis.
You can just transform the data you have into the data you need to have.
You need to calculate fund total divided by household count.
Convert your data to a table and name the table “SpendingData.”
You just created one of the fields you need for your chart: spending per household.
If the colored bars annoy you, clean up the formatting of the table.
Convert your data to a table and name the table “SpendingData.”
Calculating the Per_Household figure was straightforward, because you had all the data you needed right there on the spreadsheet.
But you’re in a different situation with Region, since there’s nothing implicit in the data that you can use to calculate Region.
You need to incorporate more data in order to determine the region for each row.
What kind of data do you need? What would you do with it?
You can derive this figure using the data you received.
There’s no formula you can use to get “West” from “Aleutians East Borough” or “AK.”
You’re going to need something else to make this work.
Load this! You can poke around in search engines for a few minutes and find data like this: a key that shows how state names fit with regions.
Using this data, you can bring Region data into your spending spreadsheet, which will enable you to create that chart they want.
This key shows how State and Region match each other.
If your spreadsheet doesn’t have the data you need, maybe you can use another data source to bring that data in.
The V stands for vertical, and what the function does is look up a reference value in a vertical list and then return the value from another column that matches the position of  the value in the vertical list.
This is the value you’re looking up in a lookup key data set.
Here’s a reference to the table containing your lookup key.
This number specifies the column of the table that contains the value you want returned.
So it looks like you’re going to have to cross-reference the region to the state abbreviation, then use that abbreviation to cross-reference the region to your original data.
Fortunately, VLOOKUP will make quick work of bringing these data sets together.
Now you’ll have both data sets on the same sheet.
Stop! The data doesn’t match! In the new file, state names are spelled out, and in the original data, state names are abbreviated.
You may not use the same formula element more than once, and you won’t need to use all of them.
Note: Each thing from the pool can be used only once!
This number specifies the column with the data you want returned.
In the first row, the value you’re looking up is “Alabama”
You want VLOOKUP to return the corresponding value in the second column.
We don’t have to use the [range_lookup] argument, since we know the state data is complete and in order.
If  you haven’t already, type this formula into your cell C2 and copy/paste it for each row.
You’re just a step away from having all the data you need to create the chart the Geopolitical Grunts want.
Create the VLOOKUP formula that will bring region data into your spending spreadsheet and then create the pivot chart your client wants.
Add a Region column to your original data and then write the VLOOKUP formula that will look up the region field based on the state abbreviation in that row.
NOTE: You will need to have the fourth argument of VLOOKUP be FALSE.
Put the formula to look up your Region value here.
Just click “Pivot Chart” rather than “Pivot Table” and let Excel create the chart.
You will have to change the title and formatting to get the chart right.
You just added another column to your data set and then created a pivot chart.
Add a Region column to your original data and then write the VLOOKUP formula that will look up the region field based on the state abbreviation in that row.
Here’s what the “Move or Copy” dialog box looks like.
You get to it from right-clicking on the sheet’s tab at the bottom of the screen.
The second and third arguments point to the lookup table you created.
Take a look at the help screens for more information on this argument.
Just click “Pivot Chart” rather than “Pivot Table” and let Excel create the table.
You will have to change the title and formatting to get the chart right.
Lots of things you need to do to clean this up....
Create segments to feed the r ight data into your analysis.
The data you receive to analyze inside Excel is just a starting point.
If  that data doesn’t do what you need it to do for your analysis, every tool of  Excel is at your disposal to mutate the data into the form you need.
Q: Will I always use VLOOKUP to do this sort of thing? A: By no means! VLOOKUP is powerful, but there are other lookup functions as well.
There’s HLOOKUP, which does horizontal lookups, as well as INDEX and MATCH, which are popular but slightly harder to understand.
Q: So there’s a lot of versatility in Excel’s functions when it comes to looking things up.
But you never know what formulas you’ll be able to use to slice and dice data into the form you need.
Remember, earlier in the chapter you used simple division to create a new field, which you graphed using a pivot chart.
Q: Now that I have lookup formulas and division, what else can I use to segment data points?
Say you wanted to tag all the records in your database that were Department of Defense programs in Maryland.
It’d be easy to use a simple AND function to create a Boolean value.
Q: And I could take that Boolean value and use it with a formula like COUNTIFS to compare it with other values in my data set.
A: Or better yet, you could plug the Boolean value somewhere into a pivot table.
Boolean functions are fantastic for segmentation, and they play really well with pivot tables.
Q: You know, this is kind of funny advice you’re giving me.
What you’re basically saying is that there are a lot of different functions and techniques that can all do the same basic thing.
Q: And at the same time you’re not giving me any quick and easy rules for how to use those functions and techniques for segmentation.
But you’ve learned enough about the features of Excel that all the stuff you don’t know consists of either super-advanced topics or subtle variations on the themes you’ve already picked up.
At this point, your goal should be to play with the functions and think creatively about how to make them work for your specific problems.
A: That might be overstating it a bit, but you’re well on your way.
Just as a book on Microsoft Word won’t show you how to write the Great American Novel, a book on Excel can’t teach you to create a brilliant spreadsheet.
Q: What can teach me how to do wild stuff in Excel? A: You can certainly always be on the lookout for people’s novel solutions to problems, but the best way to get good with Excel once you have a strong base of knowledge is just to learn as many functions as you can and experiment with making them work together.
You’ll inevitably surprise yourself with the creative ways you can use Excel.
Q: It probably wouldn’t hurt to be good at math, either.
A solid book on general data analysis or analysis for your area of expertise would show you some of the theoretical points that will make your spreadsheets smarter.
In the meantime, let’s see what your friend at Geopolitical Grunts has to say about your pivot chart.
Ah, clients.… What are you going to do? You flash a little skill, and once they know what you’re capable of  doing, they’ll never leave you alone!
What would be really nice would be to break out the department-level projects from everything else.
Could you filter the data so that it only includes transactions where the word.
And while you’re at it, could you show me all the dates rather than just 2009? Like grouping a bunch of bars together that show regional averages by year?
Your client would like a little more detail in his chart.
Looks like you’re going to have to create a new segment.…
FIND() returns an error if the requested text substring is not.
Adding dates to your pivot chart is the easy part.
Drag the date field out of  the Filter box and into the box that will make the pivot show many bars representing region and year, not just region.
Your raw data rows need a tag to denote whether each transaction is from a department-level organization or not.
Create a Boolean data field that contains TRUE if  the word “Department” is in the majagency_tr field.
If  you need help, take a look at the hint below.
Since you’ve added data to your data table, you’ll need to press the button in the Ribbon to refresh your pivot table.
Then add your new field as a filter, showing only data points where it’s TRUE that the transaction is from a department-level organization.
You just created a new segment to describe transactions originating from department-level organizations.
Adding dates to your pivot chart is the easy part.
Drag the date field out of  the Filter box and into the box that will make the pivot show many bars representing region and year, not just region.
Your raw data rows need a tag to denote whether each transaction is from a department-level organization or not.
Create a Boolean data field that contains TRUE if the word “Department” is in the majagency_tr field.
Since you’ve added data to your data table, you’ll need to press the button in the Ribbon to refresh your pivot table.
Then add your new field as a filter, showing only data points where it’s TRUE that the transaction is from a department-level organization.
Click the refresh button to enable you to include your new field.Here’s your new chart!
Which is a good thing, because there’s a whole lot of  it.
So much of  it, that it’s hard to keep track of  it all.
There’s so much of  it that you could get buried in it all.
You’ve enabled Geopolit ical Grunts to fol low the money trail…
It’s been great having you here in Datavil le !
We’re sad to see you leave, but there’s nothing like taking what you’ve learned and putting it to use.
You’re just beginning your Excel journey, and we’ve put you in the.
We’re dying to hear how things go, so drop us a line at the Head First Labs.
You’re not finished yet, are you? But there is so much left!
But Excel is a complicated program, and there’s so much left to learn.
Data analysis It’s one thing to be able to rock and roll inside Excel, but it’s another thing altogether to be a good data analyst.
Data analysis is a broad (and hot) field that encompasses knowledge not only of  Excel and other software but of  higher level topics like statistics and psychology.
Crack data analysts are omnivorous and voracious thinkers when it comes to data, and if  you’re interested in boning up on data analysis, might we suggest…
A learner’s guide to  big numbers, statistics, and good decisions.
The format painter The format painter is one of  those tools inside Excel that you’ll use all the time.
The format painter provides a super-quick way to copy formatting attributes from one cell to another.
Just select the cell that has the formatting you want to copy to another cell, click the Format Painter button, and then click on the cell or range where you want to apply that formatting.
If  you want to apply the formatting you’ve loaded into the format painter to a number of  places in your spreadsheet (rather than just one), double-click the button when the cell whose formatting you want to copy is highlighted.
You can also achieve the same results using Paste Special > Formatting.
The Data Analysis ToolPak The Data Analysis ToolPak is a set of  analysis tools that comes standard with Excel but isn’t activated by default.
If  you need to use Excel for serious statistical operations like hypothesis testing, you’ll want to take a look at this feature.
Check out the Help files for information on how to activate it.
Ever needed a formula to return more than one result? Does that question blow your mind? Array formulas are a conceptually difficult but programmatically powerful feature of  Excel that push functions to the limits of  their performance.
The Data Analysis ToolPak has a bunch of cool statistical functions.
Shapes and SmartArt Excel 2007 introduced a bunch of  visual formatting tools, and this book has only scratched the surface of  those tools.
If  you enjoy thinking visually, try poking around the Shapes and SmartArt features.
They are a treasure trove for quick and easy yet elegant formatting options for flow charts and other visualizations.
You can draw all sorts of interesting diagrams inside Excel using Shapes and SmartArt.
Controlling recalculat ion and performance tuning If  your spreadsheet gets large and full of  formulas, especially array formulas, you might experience slowdowns as all your formulas recalculate when you update data.
If  you suspect you’re experiencing something like this, head over to the Options menu and play around with the settings that control Excel’s recalculation and other performance behaviors.
Connect ing to the Web All of  us spend time surfing the Web, so why not make Excel and the Web work together? Excel has a number of  facilities for bringing web data into your worksheets and exporting your spreadsheets for use on the Web.
You can pull data into Excel from relational databases like Microsoft Access and from a variety of  other external sources besides the Internet.
Interfacing databases with Excel pivot tables using OLAP (Online Analytical Processing) technology is a particularly powerful and cool way to analyze data.
The spreadsheet on your computer Databases on the Internet or in an Access file.
Collaborat ion Excel’s collaboration features like Track Changes make working with other people on the same spreadsheet a lot easier.
To look at some of  the collaboration features, head over to the Review tab.
Have you learned most of Excel’s features, even the super-technical stuff  like array formulas, and find yourself  demanding more? Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) is a full-blown programming language that you can use inside Excel to create your own functions and much, much more.
I want to optimize now! I don’t want to have to install.
Some of  the best features of  Excel aren’t installed by default.
That’s right, in order to run the optimization from Chapter 10, you need to activate the.
Solver, an add-in that is included in Excel by default but not activated without your.
Installing the Solver in Excel is no problem if  you follow these simple steps.
Make sure that the Solver Add-in box is checked, and then press OK.
Take a look at the Data tab to make sure that the Solver button is there for you to use.
Make sure that Solver can be seen under the Data tab.
With those steps complete, you’re ready to start running optimizations!
Excel versions of, covered in this book, xxxii website resources, xxxiii (see also spreadsheets)
Introduction to Formulas Can you live it up on the last night of your vacation? Here’s what you budgeted and what you spent Excel is great for keeping records...
Formulas work with your data Looks like Bob forgot a receipt...
Your friends sent you all the receipts References keep your formulas working even if your data changes Check your formulas carefully Refer to a bunch of cells using a range Use SUM to add the elements in a range Bob and Sasha wonder whether we’ve been taking the right approach...
Your friends agree: split the checks individually When you copy and paste a formula, the references shift Excel formulas let you drill deep into your data Everyone has plenty of cash left for a food-filled night in New York City!
Visual Design CRMFreak needs to present their financials to analysts The dollar sign is part of your cell’s formatting How to format your data The boss approves! Design principle: keep it simple Clash of the design titans… Use fonts to draw the eye to what is most important Cell styles keep formatting consistent for elements that repeat With your cell styles selected, use Themes to change your look He likes it, but there’s something else… Use proximity and alignment to group like things together Your spreadsheet is a hit!
References Your computer business is in disarray Your production manager has a spreadsheet with costs MIN returns the lowest number in a series Let Excel fill in ranges by starting your formula and using your mouse Excel got the right answer using a more sophisticated reference Things just got even better… Use absolute references to prevent shifting on copy/paste Your profit margin is now even higher… Absolute references give you a lot of options Named ranges simplify your formulas With all this data, you’d have to write a ton of formulas Excel’s Tables make your references quick and easy Structured references are a different dimension of absolute reference Your profitability forecasts proved accurate.
Change Your Point of View Political consultants need help decoding their fundraising database Find the names of the big contributors Sort changes the order of rows in your data Sorting shows you different perspectives on a large data set See a lot more of your data with Zoom Your client is impressed! Filters hide data you don’t want to see Use Filter drop boxes to tell Excel how to filter your data An unexpected note from the Main Campaign… The Main Campaign is delighted with your work Donations are pouring in!
Data Types Your doctor friend is on a deadline and has broken data Somehow your average formula divided by zero Data in Excel can be text or numbers The doctor has had this problem before You need a function that tells Excel to treat your text as a value A grad student also ran some stats…and there’s a problem Errors are a special data type Now you’re a published scientist.
Finding Functions Should you rent additional parking? You need a plan to find more functions Excel’s help screens are loaded with tips and tricks Here’s the convention center’s ticket database for the next month Anatomy of a function reference The Dataville Convention Center COO checks in… Functions are organized by data type and discipline Your spreadsheet shows ticket counts summarized for each date Box tickets for you!
Formula Auditing Should you buy a house or rent? Use Net Present Value to discount future costs to today’s values The broker has a spreadsheet for you Models in Excel can get complicated Formula auditing shows you the location of your formula’s arguments Excel’s loan functions all use the same basic elements The PMT formula in the broker’s spreadsheet calculates your monthly payment Formulas must be correct, and assumptions must be reasonable The broker weighs in… Your house was a good investment!
What if Analysis Should your friend Betty advertise? Betty has projections of best and worst cases for different ad configurations You need to evaluate all her scenarios Scenarios helps you keep track of different inputs to the same model Scenarios saves different configurations of the elements that change Betty wants to know her breakeven Goal Seek optimizes a value by trying a bunch of different candidate values Betty needs you to add complexity to the model Solver can handle much more complex optimization problems Do a sanity check on your Solver model Solver calculated your projections Betty’s best-case scenario came to pass…
Text Functions Your database of analytic customers just crashed! Here’s the data Text to Columns uses a delimiter to split up your data Text to Columns doesn’t work in all cases Excel has a suite of functions for dealing with text LEFT and RIGHT are basic text extraction functions You need to vary the values that go into the second argument Business is starting to suffer for lack of customer data This spreadsheet is starting to get large! FIND returns a number specifying the position of text Text to Columns sees your formulas, not their results Paste Special lets you paste with options Looks like time’s running out… Your data crisis is solved!
Pivot Tables Head First Automotive Weekly needs an analysis for their annual car review issue You’ve been asked to do a lot of repetitive operations Pivot tables are an incredibly powerful tool for summarizing data Pivot table construction is all about previsualizing where your fields should go The pivot table summarized your data way faster than formulas would have Your editor is impressed! You’re ready to finish the magazine’s data tables Your pivot tables are a big hit!
Booleans Are fishermen behaving on Lake Dataville? You have data on catch amounts for each boat Boolean expressions return a result of TRUE or FALSE IF gives results based on a Boolean condition Your IF formulas need to accommodate the complete naming scheme Summarize how many boats fall into each category COUNTIFS is like COUNTIF, only way more powerful When working with complex conditions, break your formula apart into columns Justice for fishies!
Segmentation You are with a watchdog that needs to tally budget money Here’s the graph they want Here’s the federal spending data, broken out by county Sometimes the data you get isn’t enough Your problems with region are bigger Here’s a lookup key VLOOKUP will cross-reference the two data sources Create segments to feed the right data into your analysis Geopolitical Grunts would like a little more nuance You’ve enabled Geopolitical Grunts to follow the money trail…
