For more information on this and other Manning titles go to www.manning.com.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
We're excited to see the book reach this stage and we're looking forward to its continued development and eventual release.
This is an intermediate level book designed for anyone writing applications using, or responsible for managing Elasticsearch in a production environment.
We've striven to make the content both approachable and meaningful, and to explain not just how to do things with Elasticsearch, but also why things are done the way they are.
We feel it is important to know Elasticsearch's foundations prior to diving into all of the different ways you can leverage it.
Chapter 1 explains what Elasticsearch is: what a typical use-case looks like, the tasks it's good at, and the challenges it faces.
By the end of chapter one, you'll know if Elasticsearch is likely to be a good fit for you and what you can expect from it.
Chapter 2 is about getting your hands dirty with Elasticsearch's functionality.
You will understand how data is organized, both logically and physically.
By the end, you'll know how to index and search for documents, as well as how to configure Elasticsearch.
Elasticsearch is, as the name suggests, elastic, so spreading to more machines or shrinking to less is what it does best.
Looking ahead, in part 2, we'll cover Elasticsearch's core functionality when it comes to dealing with data: indexing, searching, analysis, and faceting.
In part 3, we'll cover the advanced functionality that will let you take your search application to the next level, such as geo-spatial searches and relationships between documents.
Finally, part 4 is all about making Elasticsearch perform to your production standards.
We'll talk about tuning indexing and search performance, as well as administering your cluster.
As you're reading, we hope you’ll take advantage of the Author Online forum.
We appreciate any feedback, as it is very helpful in the development process.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
And that's a good thing, because search helps you finish tasks quickly and easily.
Whether you're buying something from an online shop or visiting a blog, you expect to have a search box somewhere to help you find what you're looking for, without scanning the whole website.
Maybe it's just me, but when I wake up in the morning, I wish I could just enter the kitchen and type in “bowl” somewhere and have my favorite bowl highlighted.
We've also come to expect a lot of those search boxes.
I don't want to have to type the whole “bowl” word; I'm expecting the search box to come with suggestions.
And I don't want results and suggestions to just come up to me in some random order.
I want the search to be smart and give me the most relevant results first.
For example, if I'm on an online shop searching for “laptop,” and I have to scroll through laptop accessories to get to an actual laptop, I'm likely to go somewhere else after the first page.
And this is not only because we're in a hurry, and spoiled with good search interfaces, it's also because there's increasingly more stuff to choose from.
A while ago, a friend asked me to help her buy a new laptop.
Good keyword search is often not enough: you need some aggregated data, so you can narrow the results down to what you're interested in.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
I've seen some websites where you search for something and get the results in few minutes.
If you want to provide search for some of your data, you'll have to deal with what we've just talked about: return relevant results to searches, return some statistics, and do all that quickly.
And this is where search engines come into play, because they're built exactly to meet those challenges.
You can deploy a search engine on top of a relational database, to create indexes and speed up the SQL queries.
Or, you can index data from your NoSQL data-store, to add search capabilities there.
You can do that with Elasticsearch, and it works especially well with document-oriented stores like MongoDB, because data is represented in Elasticsearch as documents, too.
Modern search engines, like Elasticsearch, also do a good job storing your data.
So you can use it as a NoSQL data store with powerful search capabilities.
It's open-source, distributed and it's built on top of Apache Lucene, an open-source search engine library, which allows you to implement search functionality in your own Java application.
Elasticsearch takes this functionality and extends it to make storing, indexing and searching faster, easier and, as the name suggests, elastic.
And your application doesn't need to be written in Java to work with Elasticsearch.
It allows you to send data over HTTP in JSON to index, search, and manage your Elasticsearch cluster.
We'll expand the features above in the rest of this chapter, and you'll learn to use them throughout this book.
If any of those topics appears to be overwhelming, don't worry.
We'll take each topic and explain it thoroughly in the following chapters.
First, let's take a closer look at the challenges search engines are typically confronted with, and Elasticsearch's approach in solving them.
One of the main questions you might have at this point is how Elasticsearch fits your use case.
To get a better idea, let’s look at an example to illustrate how Elasticsearch works.
Imagine yourself working on a website that hosts lots of blogs, and you want to let users search for posts across the whole site.
The first thing you need to do is to make keyword searches work.
For example, if someone is searching for “elections,” you'd better return all posts containing that word.
A search engine will do that for you, but for a good search you'll need more than that: results need to come in quickly and they need to be relevant.
And it's also nice to have some features that will help users search, even though they don't know the exact words of what they're looking for: detecting typos, providing suggestions and breaking down results in to categories are some of those features.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
If you want to get practical and jump to installing it, jump to section 1.5
And you can always come back to the rest of this chapter for the high-level overview.
If you have a huge number of posts in your site, searching through all of them for the word “elections” can take a long time.
That's where Elasticsearch helps, because it uses Lucene's high-performance search engine library to index all your data by default.
An index is a data structure you create along with your data, which is meant to allow faster searches.
You can add indexes to fields in pretty much any database, and there are several ways to do it.
Lucene does it with inverted indexing, which means it creates a data structure where it keeps a list of where each word belongs.
For example, using inverted indexing with blog tags might look like the following table.
This speed gain makes a lot of sense in the context of a search engine.
In real world, you're rarely searching for just one word.
An inverted index is appropriate for a search engine when it comes to relevance, too.
For example, when you're looking up a word like “peace,” not only will you see which document matches, but you get the number of matching documents for free.
This is important, because if a word occurs in most documents, it's probably less relevant.
At this point you know that “in” is a common word, and the fact that this document matched doesn't say much about how relevant it is to your search.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
Although, it's not “you” who has to know you're getting closer, Elasticsearch will do that for you.
You'll learn all about tuning it for relevancy in chapter 7
That said, there is a tradeoff for this improved search performance and relevancy.
The index will take up disk space, and adding new blog posts will be slower, because you also have to update the index after adding the data itself.
On the upside, you can do a lot of tuning to make Elasticsearch faster, both when it comes to indexing and searching.
Then there's the hard part: how do you make the blog posts that actually are about elections appear before the ones that simply contain that word? With Elasticsearch, you have a few algorithms for calculating the relevancy score, which is used by default to sort the results.
The relevancy score is a number that's associated to each document matching your search criteria, which should indicate how relevant the given document is to the criteria.
For example, if a blog post contains “elections” more times than another, you can think it's more likely to be about elections.
Besides choosing the algorithm, you have lots of ways built in Elasticsearch to influence the relevancy score to suit your needs.
For example, you can “boost” the score of a particular field, like the title of a post, to be more important than the body.
This will give higher scores to documents that match your search criteria in the title, compared to similar documents that only match with the body.
You can make exact matches count more than partial matches, and you can even use a script to add custom criteria to the way score is calculated.
For example, if you let users like posts, you can boost the score based on the number of likes, or you can make newer posts have higher scores than similar, older posts.
But you don't have to worry about any of these right now, we'll discuss relevancy in great detail in chapter 7
This chapter is only about what you can do with Elasticsearch and when you would want to use those features.
Finally, with Elasticsearch you have a lot of options that make your searches intuitive and go beyond exactly matching what the user types in.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
And it's also good when the user didn't know exactly what to search for in the first place.
A fuzzy query can be used so a search for a typo-ed “bicycel” will match a blog post that's about bicycles.
We'll explore the fuzzy query and other features that make your searches relevant in chapter 7
One of them is to present some statistics via facets, which we'll cover in chapter 6
Imagine users entering your blog, and seeing on the right-hand side a list of popular topics.
Those who are interested in cycling would click that to narrow the results down.
You can use suggestions to predict their searches as they type, like most search engines on the web do.
You can also show some popular results as they type, with some special query types that match prefixes, wild cards or regular expressions.
For now, let's look at how Elasticsearch is typically used in production.
We've already established that Elasticsearch is good for storing and indexing your data, in order to get quick and relevant results to your searches.
But in the end it's just a search engine, and you'll never use it on it's own.
Like any other data store, you'll need a way to feed data into it, and you'll probably need some sort of interface for the user searching that data.
To get an idea of how Elasticsearch might fit into a bigger system, let's talk about 3 typical scenarios:
Like we've discussed, you may have a website that allows people to write blog posts, and you also want to search through them.
You can use Elasticsearch to store all the data related to these posts, and serve queries as well.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
We'll look at a couple of overall designs on how that might be done.
As the back end of a ready-made solution built around it.
Because Elasticsearch is open-source and offers a straightforward HTTP interface, there's a big ecosystem around it that you can use.
For example, Elasticsearch is popular for centralizing logs: you have tools that can write to Elasticsearch, and tools that can read from it.
So you won't need to develop anything, just to configure those tools to work the way you want.
Traditionally, search engines have been deployed on top of well-established data stores, to provide fast and relevant search alone.
That's because typically, search engines didn't offer durable storage or a lot of other features that are often needed, such as statistics.
Elasticsearch is one of those modern search engines providing durable storage, statistics, and many other features you've come to expect from a data store.
Especially if you start a new project, it's a good idea to consider if you can use Elasticsearch as the only data store, to make you design as simple as possible.
You can also use it on top of another data store, as we'll discuss later.
Let's take the blog example: when someone writes a new blog post, it can be stored in Elasticsearch.
Similarly, you can use Elasticsearch to retrieve, search or do statistics through all that data, as you can see in figure 1.1
There are lots of features that make Elasticsearch a tempting NoSQL data-store.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
There are situations where Elasticsearch doesn't provide all the functionality you need from a data store.
For example, transaction support or complex relationships are features that, at least in version 1.0, aren't present.
So if you need those features, you might want to try to use Elasticsearch along with a different data store.
Or, you might already have a pretty complex system that works, except you want to add search.
It might be quite a risky step to re-architect the whole system for the sole purpose of using Elasticsearch alone.
Either way, you'll have to find a way to keep the two data stores synchronized.
Depending on what your primary data store is, and how your data is laid out, you can deploy an Elasticsearch plug in to keep the two entities synchronized, as illustrated in figure 1.2
Figure 1.2 Elasticsearch in the same system with another data store.
Typically, when you do this synchronizing, Elasticsearch will also store the original data.
For example, let's assume you have a retail store with lots of products stored in an SQL database.
You need some fast and relevant searching, so you install Elasticsearch.
Next, to index data, you'll need to deploy something that will pull all the data corresponding to each product, and.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
Each product will be a document, and when a user  types in some criteria, a number of product documents will come back as results.
In some use-cases, you don't have to write a single line of code to get the job done with Elasticsearch, because there are lots of tools built to work with; you don't have to write yours from scratch.
For example, let's say you want to deploy a large-scale logging framework, where you want to store, search and analyze a large number of events.
Then, to search and analyze those logs in a visual interface, you can use Kibana.4
Figure 1.3 Elasticsearch in a system of logging tools that supports it out-of-the box.
Even though Elasticsearch is written in Java, there's more than just a Java API that lets you work with it.
It also exposes an HTTP API, which can be used by any application, no matter the programming language it was written in.
What's more, the HTTP requests and replies typically come in JSON.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
A JSON object typically contains keys and values, where values can be strings, numbers, true/false, null, another object or an array.
YAML, which stands for Yet Another Markup Language, is also supported for the same purpose, and you can YAML, visit http://yaml.org.
While JSON is typically used for HTTP communication, the configuration files are usually written in YAML.
In this book, we'll stick with the popular formats: JSON for HTML communication and YAML for configuration.
For example, a log event might look like this when you index it in Elasticsearch:
A A field with a string value #B that string value can be a date, that Elasticsearch will evaluate it automatically.
Sending data and running queries by sending JSON objects over HTTP makes it easy for someone to extend anything, from a syslog daemon like rsyslog to a connecting framework like ManifoldCF, to interact with Elasticsearch.
And if you're building a new application from scratch, or just want to add search to an existing one, the REST API is one of the features that makes Elasticsearch appealing.
In the next section, we'll look at other such features.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
When you want to start using Elasticsearch from your application, or you're at the stage of evaluating it, you might have two sets of essential questions:
When it comes to indexing and searching, a lot of Elasticsearch's functionality maps to that of Apache Lucene, since that is the search engine library on which it's built.
Elasticsearch exposes most of its functionality though its REST API, extends it in a lot of places, and has a different implementation of some of the concepts found in Lucene.
In terms of structuring your data, the main unit of indexing and searching is a document.
A document can be a blog post with all its metadata, a user with all its metadata, or any other type of data you plan to search for.
Those documents are organized in document types, and document types in indices.
In SQL terms, you can roughly think of an Elasticsearch index as a database, and a document type as a table in that database.
Whether you want to synchronize Elasticsearch with an external data store, such as MongoDB, or you want some additional features, there are lots of plug ins you can choose from.
We'll talk more about plug ins in chapter 10, and for now, we'll look at the core functionality.
Being a search engine library, anyone could use Lucene to implement search in their own Java projects.
And if you don't work with Java, there are a few ports of Lucene in other languages.
Lucene could do all the heavy lifting for you, from indexing and storing documents to searching them in various ways.
So why would you need Elasticsearch when you can use Lucene directly? The answer: Elasticsearch offers functionality you'll want to use in your application, which is not available in Lucene because it's out of its scope.
For example, Elasticsearch has lots caching features, has an HTTP API you can use from applications written in any language, and is also backwardscompatible.
Elasticsearch makes most of Lucene's features available for your application through the REST API we've talked about earlier.
But we've already established that Elasticsearch offers much more than good keyword search.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
If you've heard about Lucene before, you've probably also heard about Apache Solr, which is also an open-source, distributed search engine based on it.
Actually, Lucene and Solr have merged as Apache projects on 2010
So you might wonder how does Elasticsearch compare with Solr.
Both search engines provide similar functionality, and features evolve very quickly from one version to the other.
You can search the web for comparisons, but we'd recommend taking them with a grain of salt.
Besides being tied to particular versions – which makes such comparisons obsolete in a matter of months, few authors of such comparisons have in-depth knowledge of both solutions.
That said, there are a few historical facts that might explain the origins of the two products.
At the time of this writing, both Elasticsearch and Solr have features that the other one doesn't, and choosing between them may be down to the actual functionality you need at that point in time.
For many use-cases, all the functionality you need is covered by both and, as it's often the case with competitors, choosing between them becomes a matter of taste.
Through analysis, the words from the text you're indexing become terms in Elasticsearch.
The same applies when you search, as illustrated in figure 1.4
Maybe a document which contains both those words somewhere will do.
The default analyzer will break text into words by looking for common word separators, such as a space or a comma.
Figure 1.4 Analysis breaks text into words, both when you're indexing and searching.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
By default, Elasticsearch will store your documents as they are, and it will also put all the terms resulting from analysis into the inverted index, to enable the all-important fast and relevant searches.
We'll also go into more detail on indexing and storing data in chapter 3
Unlike relational databases, that store data in records or rows, Elasticsearch stores it in documents.
To some extent, the two concepts are similar: if you have a table in mind, you have columns, and for each column, each row has a value.
Documents, have keys and values, in much the same way.
The difference is that a document is more flexible, mainly because, in Elasticsearch at least, a document can be hierarchical.
This flexibility is important because it encourages you to keep all the data that belongs to a logical entity in the same document, as opposed to different rows in different tables.
This way, searches will be fast because you don't need joins or any other relational work.
If you have an SQL background, you might miss the ability to use joins.
Unfortunately, they're not supported, at least in version 1.0, because it's difficult to do complex relational work in a distributed environment.
When data starts going back and forth between many nodes, the query time decreases dramatically.
There are ways to define relationships in Elasticsearch (We explore these in chapter 8)
While this functionality is limited compared to what you'd expect in a relational database, it can still prove very useful.
For example, if you index access logs from your HTTP server, you can have a relationship between each log and the blog post that was accessed.
This way, you can let users search for blog posts matching certain criteria, and show the most accessed first.
But how would this data actually be organized? Let's say we'll put all the posts of each particular blog in its own index.
And you have two blogs: one about cycling and one about elections, like in figure 1.5
An index is much like a database, in the sense that it can have its own completely different settings, such as the way it's stored on disk or whether it's readonly.
Indices are stored on disk in different sets of files, makes them physically separated, although you can search across multiple indices in the same way you search in one index.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
Inside each index, each document has to go into a type.
The purpose of types is to logically separate different kinds of documents.
In our case, let's assume we have blog posts and access logs.
In the following figure, we'll define those two types in each index.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
Figure 1.6 Types provide logical separation within the same index.
Types are also used to specify relationships between documents as well.
You can define a oneto-many relationship between documents of one type, and documents of another, which we'll cover in chapter 8
The resulting data structure is illustrated in the following figure.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
Next, let's look at how this data organization lies on your physical servers running Elasticsearch.
Because it's distributed, your data can be spread on multiple such servers, which will form a cluster.
We'll have a look next at how that works, and how Elasticsearch will look when it comes to operating.
Performance is often the main reason you want a search engine.
If you have lots of data, you need to be able to index it quickly, and get results from your searches quickly.
If you have many users, you need your search engine to support many concurrent searches.
With Elasticsearch, you can do lots of tuning to make indexing operations fast, from sending many of them in the same bulk request, to changing the way your data is stored on disk; we'll discuss these techniques in detail in chapter 12
Searches can also be tuned for speed: for example, some search types are faster than others, depending on the use-case, and we'll show you how to make your searches faster in chapter 13
As your data keeps growing, an important feature is the ability to split your data across multiple servers, also known as sharding.
Fortunately, Elasticsearch is sharded by default, as you'll come to understand, making it easy to spread your data in a cluster of multiple instances.
You can also store multiple copies of the same data on multiple machines, which is good for availability.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
Another feature, which is especially useful when you have multiple instances, is the ability to change the configuration on the fly though the REST API.
The same API that you normally used for indexing and searching can be used for changing most of the configuration options.
Those changes can apply to all nodes of a cluster, when you're running a single command.
A cluster is made up of one or more nodes, where a node is an Elasticsearch process, that typically runs on a separate server.
Elasticsearch is clustered by default: when you start your first process, you have a cluster of one node, which can be expanded without making any configuration changes.
This works because Elasticsearch divides every index into chunks called shards.
When you start your first node and index your first blog posts, your one-node cluster works as illustrated in the following figure.
Figure 1.8 One node cluster with one index divided into five shards.
If you'll stay on one node forever, it doesn't – you might as well have only one shard.
But if you'll ever add new nodes to your cluster, Elasticsearch can move shards from your initial node to the new ones.
Figure 1.9 shows how a three-node cluster might look with your initial five shards spread through the available nodes.
Now the load of indexing and searching is spread between more machines, giving you more performance and capacity.
Each node can receive all kinds of requests, so from the application's point of view, talking to any node is like talking to the single entity that is your Elasticsearch cluster.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
Shards can be moved around, allowing you to expand or shrink your cluster at any time.
By default, Elasticsearch will try to balance the number of shards across your nodes, so the load is evenly spread.
The problem with the setup in figure 1.9 is that if a node goes down, part of your data will become unavailable.
To increase availability, you can create one or more copies for each of your initial shards.
Initial shards are called primaries and the copies are called replicas.
Primaries differ from replicas because they are the first to receive new documents.
Other than that, they're pretty much the same: both index the same documents eventually, and both can serve searches.
Searches run on replicas also; you can serve more concurrent searches by simply adding more nodes and replicas to your cluster.
Replicas index documents just like primary shards; they can be easily promoted to primaries.
Which is exactly what Elasticsearch does in case a node hosting a primary shard goes down.
The number of replicas per shard can be changed on the fly.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
Figure 1.10 The three-node cluster with a set of replicas.
With this cluster, if a node goes down, you'll still have a complete set of shards, because of the replicas.
From the application's point of view, the cluster continues to work as expected.
In the background, Elasticsearch automatically promotes the needed replicas to primaries, and creates additional replicas, to get back to the configuration you requested.
You'll learn more about this process in chapter 11, which is all about scaling.
To do that, you need to have at least Java 6 installed.
Once that is in place, you're typically just a download away from getting Elasticsearch ready to start.
If you don't have a Java run-time environment already, you'll have to install it first.
Any Java run-time environment should work, but typically you'd install the one from Oracle (https://www.java.com/en/download/index.jsp) or the open-source implementation OpenJDK (http://download.java.net/openjdk/)
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
You can check if it's there by using the env command on UNIX-like systems and the set command on Windows.
To check if that's your case, you can run the following command:
If it works, then you have Java in your path.
If it doesn't, you have to either configure JAVA_HOME, or add the Java binary to your path.
The Java binary is typically found wherever you installed Java (which should be JAVA_HOME), in the bin directory.
With Java set up, you need to get Elasticsearch and start it.
Then, you can simply unpack it and start Elasticsearch with the shell script from the archive:
The -f parameter is there to start Elasticsearch in foreground.
This lets you see what it's doing, and you can you can easily stop it with CTRL+C.
If you omit the -f, you'll have to look for what process to kill.
And if you need to look up the logs, you can find it in the logs/ directory within the unpacked package.
To do that, you need to install the service wrapper, which is available on GitHub.
Then copy the service/ directory in the bin/ directory of your Elasticsearch installation:
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
Finally, you'll have your init script as a symbolic link to the “elasticsearch” service wrapper script:
Now you're done! You'll be able to restart Elasticsearch by running /etc/init.d/elasticsearch restart MAC If you need an easier way to install Elasticsearch on your Mac, you can install Homebrew.
With Homebrew installed, getting elasticsearch is a matter of running:
Then you'd start it in a similar way to the tar.gz archive:
Unpack it, then run elasticsearch.bat from the bin/ directory, much like you would run elasticsearch -f on UNIX:
If you need to restart it, you'd do it like you would with any other service.
And again, that's it! If you need to restart it, you can use the init script:
If you need to see what Elasticsearch is doing, you can look up the logs in /var/log/elasticsearch/
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
Now that you have Elasticsearch installed and started, let's have a closer look at what's going on.
We'll take a look at the logs generated during startup and we'll connect to the REST API for the first time.
Let's take a look at some of those lines and what they mean:
The first line typically tells you some statistics about the node you just started.
By default, Elasticsearch will give your node a random name, in this case Basilisk, which can be changed from the configuration.
You can see details on the particular version you're running, along with the PID of the Java process that started.
Plugins are loaded during initialization, and no plugins are included by default.
Port 9300 is used by default for inter-node communication, called transport.
If you need to use the native Java API instead of the HTTP API, this is the point where you need to connect.
A master node was just elected and it's the node you've just started.
We'll talk more about master election in chapter 11, which is about scaling out.
The basic idea is that each cluster has a master node, responsible for knowing which nodes are in the cluster and where all the shards are located.
Each time the master is unavailable, a new one is elected.
In this case, we've just started the first node in the cluster, so this will be our master.
This is where applications using the REST API will connect to.
At this point you can connect to it and start issuing requests.
Gateway is the component of Elasticsearch responsible for persisting your data to disk, so that you don't lose it when the node goes down.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
A lot of what we've looked at here is configurable: from the node name to the Gateway settings.
We'll talk about configuration options, and the concepts around them, as the book progresses.
You can expect a lot such configuration options to appear in Part III, which is all about performance and administration.
Until then, you don't need to configure an awful lot, because the defaults are developer-friendly.
If you didn't install Elasticsearch on your local machine, you should be able to reach it by replacing “localhost” with the IP address of the remote machine.
By default, Elasticsearch listens for incoming HTTP requests on port 9200 of all interfaces.
If the request works, you should get a JSON reply, like the one in the following figure:
Let's look at each field of the JSON and see what it's about:
Ok: when it's true, it means that the request was successful.
Status: the HTTP error code that resulted from the request.
Name: the name of our Elasticsearch instance, that you can also see from the logs.
Version: this is a field that contains an object, to demonstrate the hierarchical nature of documents that we've discussed earlier.
The object here has a number of fields that tell you about the version you have installed: version number, its hash, the time it was built, whether it's an official release or a build from a snapshot of a branch from GitHub, and the underlying Lucene version.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
Now that you're all set up, let's have another look at what we went though in this chapter and move on to chapter chapter 2, where you'll get to know Elasticsearch even better, by indexing and searching some real data.
Here you've met Elasticsearch: an open-source, distributed search engine built on top of Apache Lucene.
It's good for indexing lots of data,  and doing full-text searches on that data afterwards.
It's very powerful, as well as fast when it comes to searching, which lets you implement all sorts of functionality, from sorting results by relevance to statistics and search suggestions.
Getting started is a matter of a couple of commands, regardless of which operating system you're on.
You can work with it through the REST API exposed via HTTP, by sending JSON data and getting JSON replies.
And in addition to the full-text search functionality, you can also look at Elasticsearch as a NoSQL data-store.
It's document-oriented and scalable: if one server isn't enough to hold your indexing or search load, you can always solve that by adding more instances.
Elasticsearch is clustered by default, and automatically balances your data between instances.
This makes it very good for cloud environments, because it lets you add or remove instances in a fast and straightforward way.
We welcome reader comments about anything in the manuscript - other than typos and other simple mistakes.
These will be cleaned up during production of the book by copyeditors and proofreaders.
