Copyright For online information and ordering of this and other Manning books, please visit www.manning.com.
The publisher offers discounts on this book when ordered in quantity.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, or otherwise, without prior written permission of the publisher.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks.
Where those designations appear in the book, and Manning Publications was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in initial caps or all caps.
Recognizing the importance of preserving what has been written, it is Manning’s policy to have the books we publish printed on acid-free paper, and we exert our best efforts to that end.
Recognizing also our responsibility to conserve the resources of our planet, Manning books are printed on paper that is at least 15 percent recycled and processed without the use of elemental chlorine.
Fundamentals This first part of the book provides the fundamentals to help you get started with Java 8
By the end of this first part, you’ll have a full understanding of what lambda expressions are, and you’ll be able to write code that’s both concise and flexible enough to easily adapt to changing requirements.
In chapter 1, we summarize the main changes to Java (lambda expressions, method references, streams, and default methods) and set the scene for the book.
Chapter 3 gives a full explanation, with code examples and quizzes at every step, of the concepts of lambda expressions and method references.
It’s an expressive language and continues to be used for projects both large and small.
So the question is this: why should you care about Java 8?
We argue that the changes to Java 8 are in many ways more profound than any other changes to Java in its history.
The good news is that the changes enable you to write programs more easily—instead of writing verbose code like the following (to sort a list of apples in inventory based on their weight),
This book will explain what it does and how you can write similar code!
There’s also a hardware influence: commodity CPUs have become multicore—the processor in your laptop or desktop machine probably has four or more CPU cores within it.
But the vast majority of existing Java programs use only one of these cores and leave the other three idle (or spend a small fraction of their processing power running part of the operating system or a virus checker)
Prior to Java 8, experts might tell you that you have to use threads to use these cores.
The problem is that working with threads is difficult and error prone.
Java has followed an evolutionary path of continually trying to make concurrency easier and less error prone.
Java 5 added industrial-strength building blocks like thread pools and concurrent collections.
Java 7 added the fork/join framework, making parallelism more practical but still difficult.
Java 8 has a new, simpler way of thinking about parallelism.
But you still have to follow some rules, which you’ll learn in this book!
From these two examples (more concise code and simpler use of multicore processors) springs the whole consistent edifice that is Java 8
We start by giving you a quick taste of these ideas (hopefully enough to intrigue you, but short enough to summarize them):
As a result, it avoids the need for you to write code that uses synchronized, which is not only highly error prone but is also more expensive than you may realize on multicore CPUs.[1]
Multicore CPUs have separate caches (fast memory) attached to each processor core.
Locking requires these to be synchronized, requiring relatively slow cache-coherency-protocol intercore communication.
But thinking of passing code to methods as a mere consequence of Streams downplays its range of uses within Java 8
It gives you a new concise way to express behavior parameterization.
Suppose you want to write two methods that differ in only a few lines of code; you can now just pass the code of the parts that differ as an argument (this programming technique is shorter, clearer, and less error prone than the common tendency to use copy and paste)
Experts will here note that behavior parameterization could, prior to Java 8, be encoded using anonymous.
The Java 8 feature of passing code to methods (and also being able to return it and incorporate it into data structures) also provides access to a whole range of additional techniques that are commonly referred to as functional-style programming.
In a nutshell, such code, called functions in the functional programming community, can be passed around and combined in a way to produce powerful programming idioms that you’ll see in Java 8 guise throughout this book.
The meat of this chapter begins with a high-level discussion on why languages evolve, continues with sections on the core features of Java 8, and then introduces the ideas of functional-style programming that the new features simplify using and that new computer architectures favor.
In essence, section 1.1 discusses the evolution process and the concepts, which Java was previously lacking, to exploit multicore parallelism in an easy way.
Finally, section 1.5 looks ahead at the ideas of functional-style programming in Java and other languages sharing the JVM.
In summary, this chapter introduces ideas that are successively elaborated in the rest of the book.
With the 1960s came the quest for the perfect programming language.
Many thousands of programming languages later, academics have concluded that programming languages behave like an ecosystem: new languages appear and old languages are supplanted unless they evolve.
We all hope for a perfect universal language, but in reality certain languages are better fitted for certain niches.
For example, C and C++ remain popular for building operating systems and various other embedded systems because of their small run-time footprint and in spite of their lack of programming safety.
This lack of safety can lead to programs crashing unpredictably and exposing security holes for viruses and the like; indeed,
Changing to a new language and tool chain is often too painful for just a single feature, but newcomers will eventually displace existing languages, unless they evolve fast enough to keep up (older readers are often able to quote a range of such languages in which they’ve previously coded but whose popularity has since waned—Ada, Algol, COBOL, Pascal, Delphi, and SNOBOL, to name but a few)
You’re a Java programmer, and Java has been successful at colonizing (and displacing competitor languages in) a large ecosystem niche of programming tasks for the last 15 years.
Right from the start, it was a well-designed object-oriented language with many useful libraries.
It also supported small-scale concurrency from day one, with its integrated support for threads and locks (and with its early prescient acknowledgement, in the form of a hardware-neutral memory model, that concurrent threads on multicore processors can have unexpected behaviors in addition to those that happen on single-core processors)
Also, the decision to compile Java to JVM bytecode (a virtual machine code that soon every browser supported) meant that it became the language of choice for internet applet programs (do you remember applets?)
Indeed, there’s a danger that the Java virtual machine (JVM) and its bytecode will be seen as more important than the Java language itself and that, for certain applications, Java might be replaced by one of its competing languages such as Scala or Groovy, which also run on the JVM.
Java has also been successful at colonizing various aspects of embedded computing (everything from smartcards, toasters, and settop boxes to car braking systems)
This can be summarized as follows: everything is an object; and a mouse click sends an event message to a handler (invokes the Clicked method in a Mouse object)
There was initial resistance to the additional run cost of Java over C/C++, but machines got faster and programmer time became more and more.
But the climate is changing for the programming language ecosystem; programmers are increasingly dealing with so-called big data (datasets of terabytes and up) and wishing to exploit multicore computers or computing clusters effectively to process it.
And this means using parallel processing—something Java wasn’t previously friendly to.
You may have come across programming ideas from other programming niches (for example, Google’s map-reduce or the relative ease of data manipulation using database query languages such as SQL) that help you work with large volumes of data and multicore CPUs.
Figure 1.1 summarizes the language ecosystem pictorially: think of the landscape as the space of programming problems and the dominant vegetation for a particular bit of ground as the favorite language for that program.
But of course there’s hysteresis—many an old farmer will keep raising traditional crops.
In summary, new languages are appearing and becoming increasingly popular because they’ve adapted quickly to the climate change.
The main benefit of Java 8 to a programmer is that it provides more programming tools and concepts to solve new or existing programming problems more quickly or, more importantly, in a more concise, more easily maintainable way.
Although the concepts are new to Java, they’ve proved powerful in niche research-like languages.
We highlight and develop the ideas behind three such programming concepts that have driven the development of the Java 8 features to exploit parallelism and write more concise code in general.
For introductory purposes, a stream is a sequence of data items that are conceptually produced one at a time—a program might read items from an input stream one by one and similarly write items to an output stream.
The output stream of one program could well be the input stream of another.
One practical example is in Unix or Linux, where many programs operate by reading data from standard input (stdin in Unix and C, System.in in Java), operating on it, and then writing their results to standard output (stdout in Unix and C, System.out in Java)
First, a little background: Unix cat creates a stream by concatenating two files, tr translates the characters in a stream, sort sorts lines in a stream, and tail -3 gives the last three lines in a stream.
The Unix command line allows such programs to be linked together with pipes (|), giving examples such as.
Note that in Unix the commands (cat, tr, sort, and tail) are executed concurrently, so that sort can be processing the first few lines before cat or tr has finished.
A more mechanical analogy is a car-manufacturing assembly line where a stream of cars is queued between processing stations that each take a car, modify it, and pass it on to the next station for further processing; processing at separate stations is typically concurrent even though the assembly line is physically a sequence.
You can think of it as a fancy iterator for now.
The Streams API has many methods that can be chained to form a complex pipeline just like Unix commands were chained in the previous example.
The key motivation for this is that you can now program in Java 8 at a higher level of abstraction, structuring your thoughts of turning a stream of this into a stream of that (similarly to how you think when writing database queries) rather than one item at a time.
The second programming concept added to Java 8 is the ability to pass a piece of code to an API.
In the Unix example, you might want to tell the sort command to.
Although the sort command supports command-line parameters to perform various predefined kinds of sorting such as reverse order, these are limited.
The first four digits represent the year, the next two letters a country code, and last four digits the ID of a client.
You may want to sort these invoice IDs by year or perhaps using the customer ID or even the country code.
What you really want is the ability to tell the sort command to take as an argument an ordering defined by the user: a separate piece of code passed to the sort command.
Now, as a direct parallel in Java, you want to tell a sort method to compare using a customized order.
You could write a method compareUsingCustomerId to compare two invoice IDs but, prior to Java 8, you couldn’t pass this method to another method! You could create a Comparator object to pass to the sort method as we showed at the start of this chapter, but this is verbose and obfuscates the idea of simply reusing an existing piece of behavior.
Java 8 adds the ability to pass methods (your code) as arguments to other methods.
Why is this important? The Streams API is built on the idea of passing code to parameterize the behavior of its operations, just as you passed compareUsingCustomerId to parameterize the behavior of sort.
What do you have to give up? You may have to make some small changes in the way you code the behavior passed to stream methods.
At first, these changes might feel a little uncomfortable, but once you get used to them, you’ll love them.
You must provide behavior that is safe to execute concurrently on different pieces of the input.
Typically this means writing code that doesn’t access shared mutable data to do its job.
The previous parallelism arises only by assuming that multiple copies of your piece of code can work independently.
Java 8 streams exploit parallelism more easily than Java’s existing Threads API, so although it’s possible to use synchronized to break the no-shared-mutable-data rule, it’s fighting the system in that it’s abusing an abstraction optimized around that rule.
Using synchronized across multiple processing cores is often far more expensive than you expect, because synchronization forces code to execute sequentially, which works against the goal of parallelism.
In contrast, in the imperative programming paradigm you typically describe a program in terms of a sequence of statements that mutate state.
The no-shared-mutable-data requirement means that a method is perfectly described solely by the way it transforms arguments to results; in other words, it behaves as a mathematical function and has no (visible) side effects.
For example, the introduction of generics and using List<String> instead of just List may initially have been irritating.
But you’re now familiar with this style and the benefits it brings (catching more errors at compile time and making code easier to read, because you now know what something is a list of)
Other changes have made common things easier to express, for example, using a for-each loop instead of exposing the boilerplate use of an Iterator.
Note that classical object-oriented programming and functional programming, as extremes, might appear to be in conflict.
But the idea is to get the best from both programming paradigms, so you have a better chance of having the right tool for the job! We discuss this in detail in the next two sections: functions in Java and the new Streams API.
A takeaway line might be this: languages need to evolve to track changing hardware or programmer expectations (if you need convincing, then consider that COBOL was once one of the most important languages commercially)
To endure, Java has to evolve by adding new features.
This evolution will be pointless unless the new features are used, so in using Java 8 you’re protecting your way of life as a Java programmer.
On top of that, we have a feeling you’ll love using Java 8’s new features.
The word function in programming languages is commonly used as a synonym for method, particularly a static method; this is in addition to it being used for mathematical function, one without side effects.
Fortunately, as you’ll see, when Java 8 refers to functions these usages very nearly coincide.
We start by showing that functions as values are useful in themselves.
Second, values can be objects (more strictly, references to objects)
The only way to get one of these is by using new, perhaps via a factory method or a library function; object references point to instances of a class.
To help answer this, we’ll note that the whole point of a programming language is to manipulate values, which, following historical programming-language tradition, are therefore called first-class values (or citizens, in the terminology borrowed from the 1960s civil rights movement in the United States)
Other structures in our programming languages, which perhaps help us express the structure of values but which can’t be passed around during program execution, are second-class citizens.
Values as listed previously are first-class Java citizens, but various other Java concepts, such as methods and classes, exemplify second-class citizens.
Methods are fine when used to define classes, which in turn may be instantiated to produce values, but neither are values themselves.
Incidentally, you might wonder whether making other second-class citizens such as classes into first-class-citizen values might also be a good idea.
Various languages such as Smalltalk and JavaScript have explored this route.
Experiments in other languages such as Scala and Groovy have determined that allowing concepts like methods to be used as first-class values made programming easier by adding to the toolset available to programmers.
The first new Java 8 feature we introduce is that of method references.
Suppose you want to filter all the hidden files in a directory.
You need to start writing a method that given a File will tell you whether it’s hidden or not.
Thankfully there’s such a method inside the File class called isHidden.
It can be viewed as a function that takes a File and returns a boolean.
But to use it for filtering you need to wrap it into a FileFilter object that you then pass to the File.listFiles method, as follows:
You already have a method isHidden that you could use.
Now, in Java 8 you can rewrite that code as follows:
One advantage is that your code now reads closer to the problem statement.
Here’s a taste of what’s coming: methods are no longer second-class values.
Analogously to using an object reference when you pass an object around (and object references are created by new), in Java 8 when you write File::isHidden you create a method reference, which can similarly be passed around.
Given that methods contain code (the executable body of a method), then using method references enables passing code around as in figure 1.3
You’ll also see a concrete example (selecting apples from an inventory) in the next section.
Although the symbol isn’t used in Java, its name lives on.
All the code for the examples is available on the book’s GitHub page (https://github.com/java8/)
Suppose you have a class Apple with a method getColor and a variable inventory holding a list of Apples; then you might wish to select all the green apples and return them in a list.
The word filter is commonly used to express this concept.
Before Java 8, you thus might write a method filterGreenApples:
But next, somebody would like the list of heavy apples (say over 150 g), and so, with a heavy heart, you’d write the following method to achieve this (perhaps even using copy and paste):
We all know the dangers of copy and paste for software engineering (updates and bug fixes to one variant but not the other), and hey, these two methods vary only in one line: the highlighted condition inside the if construct.
But as we mentioned previously, Java 8 makes it possible to pass the code of the condition as an argument, thus avoiding code duplication of the filter method.
We explain how this works in detail in the next two chapters.
The key idea to take away for now is that you can pass around a method in Java 8!
The previous code passed a method Apple::isGreenApple (which takes an Apple for argument and returns a boolean) to filterApples, which expected a Predicate-<Apple> parameter.
The word predicate is often used in mathematics to mean something function-like that takes a value for an argument and returns true or false.
Passing methods as values is clearly useful, but it’s a bit annoying having to write a definition for short methods such as isHeavyApple and isGreenApple when they’re used perhaps only once or twice.
It introduces a new notation (anonymous functions, or lambdas) that enables you to write just.
So you don’t even need to write a method definition that’s used only once; the code is crisper and clearer because you don’t need to search to find the code you’re passing.
But if such a lambda exceeds a few lines in length (so that its behavior isn’t instantly clear), then you should instead use a method reference to a method with a descriptive name instead of using an anonymous lambda.
Java might then have been rounded off by adding filter and a few friends as generic library methods, such as.
So you wouldn’t even have to write methods like filterApples because, for example, the previous call.
But, for reasons centered on better exploiting parallelism, the designers didn’t do this.
Java 8 instead contains a whole new Collections-like API called Streams, containing a comprehensive set of operations similar to filter that functional programmers may be familiar with (for example, map, reduce), along with methods to convert between Collections and Streams, which we now investigate.
For example, let’s say you need to filter expensive transactions from a list and then group them by currency.
You’d need to write a lot of boilerplate code to implement this data processing query, as shown here:
In addition, it’s difficult to understand at a glance what the code does because of the multiple nested control-flow statements.
Using the Streams API, you can solve this problem as follows:
Don’t worry about this code for now because it may look like a bit of magic.
Chapters 4–7 are dedicated to explaining how to make sense of the Streams API.
For now it’s worth noticing that the Streams API provides a very different way to process data in comparison to the Collections API.
You need to iterate through each element one by one using a for-each loop and then process the elements.
We call this way of iterating over data external iteration.
As a second pain point of working with collections, think for a second about how you would process the list of transactions if you had a vast number of them; how can you process this huge list? A single CPU wouldn’t be able to process this large amount of data, but you probably have a multicore computer on your desk.
Ideally, you’d like to share the work among the different CPU cores available on your machine to reduce the processing time.
In theory, if you have eight cores, they should be able to process your data eight times as fast as using one core because they work in parallel.[5]
Instead of a single CPU, they have four or eight or more CPUs (usually called cores[5])
The problem is that a classic Java program uses just a single one of these cores, and the power of the others is wasted.
Similarly, many companies use computing clusters (computers connected together with fast networks) to be able to process vast amounts of data efficiently.
Java 8 facilitates new programming styles to better exploit such computers.
Google’s search engine is an example of a piece of code that’s too big to run on a single computer.
It reads every page on the internet and creates an index, mapping every word appearing on any internet page back to every URL containing that word.
Then, when you do a Google search involving several words, software can quickly use this index to give you a set of web pages containing those words.
Try to imagine how you might code this algorithm in Java (even for a smaller index than Google’s you’d need to exploit all the cores in your computer)
The problem is that exploiting parallelism by writing multithreaded code (using the Threads API from previous versions of Java) is difficult.
You have to think differently: threads can access and update shared variables at the same time.
This model is harder to think about[7] than a step-by-step sequential model.
For example, figure 1.5 shows a possible problem with two Threads trying to add a number to a shared variable sum if they’re not synchronized properly.
Traditionally via the keyword synchronized, but many subtle bugs arise from its misplacement.
Java 8’s Stream-based parallelism encourages a functional programming style where synchronized is rarely used; it focuses on partitioning the data rather than coordinating access to it.
A possible problem with two threads trying to add to a shared sum variable.
Java 8 also addresses both problems (boilerplate and obscurity involving processing collections and difficulty leveraging multicore) with the Streams API (java.util .stream)
The first design motivator is that there are many data processing patterns (similar to filterApples in the previous section, or operations familiar from database query languages such as SQL) that occur over and over again and that would benefit from forming part of a library: filtering data based on a criterion (for example, heavy apples), extracting data (for example, extracting the weight field from each apple in a list), or grouping data (for example, grouping a list of numbers into separate lists of even and odd numbers), and so on.
The second motivator is that such operations can often be parallelized.
For instance, as illustrated in figure 1.6, filtering a list on.
Finally (3), one CPU would join the two results (this is closely related to how Google searches work so quickly, of course using many more than two processors)
For now, we’ll just say that the new Streams API behaves very similarly to Java’s existing Collections API: both provide access to sequences of data items.
But it’s useful for now to keep in mind that Collections is mostly about storing and accessing data, whereas Streams is mostly about describing computations on data.
The key point here is that Streams allows and encourages the elements within a Stream to be processed in parallel.
Although it may seem odd at first, often the fastest way to filter a Collection (using filterApples on a List in the previous section) is to convert it to a Stream, process it in parallel, and then convert it back to a List, as exemplified here for both the serial and parallel cases.
One of the practical issues the Java 8 developers found in evolving Java with all these new goodies was that of evolving existing interfaces.
For example, the method Collections.sort really belongs to the List interface but was never included.
Ideally, you’d like to do list.sort(comparator) instead of Collections.sort(list, comparator)
People have always said parallelism in Java is difficult, and all this stuff about synchronized is error prone.
Where’s the magic bullet in Java 8? There are actually two magic bullets.
First, the library handles partitioning—breaking down a big stream into several smaller streams to be processed in parallel for you.
Second, this parallelism almost for free from streams works only if the methods passed to library methods like filter don’t interact, for example, by having mutable shared objects.
But it turns out that this restriction feels quite natural as a coder (see, by way of example, our Apple::isGreenApple example)
Default methods are added to Java 8 largely to support library designers by enabling them to write more evolvable interfaces.
They’re important because you’ll increasingly encounter them in interfaces, but because relatively few.
The simplest solution, which you might employ for your own interfaces, would have been for the Java 8 designers simply to add the stream method to the Collection interface and add the implementation in the ArrayList class.
But doing this would have been a nightmare for users.
There are many alternative collection frameworks that implement interfaces from the Collections API.
Adding a new method to an interface means all concrete classes must provide an implementation for it.
Language designers have no control on all existing implementations of Collections, so you have a bit of a dilemma: how can you evolve published interfaces without disrupting existing implementations?
This provides a way for an interface designer to enlarge an interface beyond those methods that were originally planned—without breaking existing code.
Java 8 uses the new default keyword in the interface specification to achieve this.
For example, in Java 8 you can now call the sort method directly on a List.
This is made possible with the following default method in the Java 8 List interface, which calls the static method Collections.sort:
This means any concrete classes of List don’t have to explicitly implement sort, whereas in previous Java versions such concrete classes would fail to recompile unless they provided an implementation for sort.
The previous sections introduced two core ideas from functional programming that are now part of Java: using methods and lambdas as first-class values, and the idea that calls to functions or methods can be efficiently and safely executed in parallel in the absence of mutable shared state.
Both of these ideas are exploited by the new Streams API we described earlier.
Common functional languages (SML, OCaml, Haskell) also provide further constructs to help programmers.
One of these is avoiding null by explicit use of more descriptive data types.
Indeed, Tony Hoare, one of the giants of computer science, said in a presentation at QCon London 2009:
It was the invention of the null reference in 1965....
I couldn’t resist the temptation to put in a null reference, simply because it was so easy to implement.
It’s a container object that may or not contain a value.
Optional<T> includes methods to explicitly deal with the case where a value is absent, and as a result you can avoid NullPointer exceptions.
In other words, it uses the type system to allow you to indicate when a variable is anticipated to potentially have a missing value.
A second idea is that of (structural) pattern matching.[8] This is used in mathematics, for example:
Here we mean the one familiar from mathematics and functional programming whereby a function is defined by cases, rather than using if-then-else.
In Java you would here write an if-then-else or a switch statement.
Other languages have shown that, for more complex data types, pattern matching can express programming ideas more concisely compared to using if-then-else.
For such data types, you might also use polymorphism and method overriding as an alternative to if-then-else, but there’s still language-design discussion as to which is more appropriate.[9] We’d say that both are useful tools and you should have both in your armory.
In the meantime, we illustrate with an example expressed in the Scala programming language (another Java-like language using the JVM that has inspired some aspects of Java evolution; see chapter 15)
Suppose you want to write a program that does basic simplifications on a tree representing an arithmetic expression.
Given a data type Expr representing such expressions, in Scala you can write the following code to decompose an Expr into its parts and then return another Expr:
For now, you can think of pattern matching as an extended form of switch that can decompose a data type into its components at the same time.
Why should the switch statement in Java be limited to primitive values and Strings? Functional languages tend to allow switch to be used on many more data types, including allowing pattern matching (in the Scala code, this is achieved using a match operation)
In object-oriented design, the visitor pattern is a common pattern used to walk through a family of classes (such as the different components of a car: wheel, engine, chassis, and so on) and apply an operation to each object visited.
One advantage of pattern matching is that a compiler can report common errors such as “Class Brakes is part of the family of classes used to represent components of class Car.
This material is positioned toward the end of the book to provide additional insight into why the new Java 8 features were added.
Following are the key concepts you should take away from this chapter:
Keep in mind the idea of language ecosystem and the consequent evolve-or-wither pressure on languages.
Although Java may be supremely healthy at the moment, you can recall other healthy languages such as COBOL that failed to evolve.
The core additions to Java 8 provide exciting new concepts and functionality to ease the writing of programs that are both effective and concise.
Multicore processors aren’t fully served by existing Java programming practice.
Functions are first-class values; remember how methods can be passed as functional values and how.
The Java 8 concept of Streams generalizes many aspects of Collections but both enables more.
You can use a default method in an interface to provide a method body if an implementing class.
Other interesting ideas from functional programming include dealing with null and using pattern.
A well-known problem in software engineering is that no matter what you do, user requirements will change.
For example, imagine an application to help a farmer understand his inventory.
The farmer might want a functionality to find all green apples in his inventory.
In addition, similar new functionalities ought to be straightforward to implement and maintainable in the long term.
Behavior parameterization is a software development pattern that lets you handle frequent requirement changes.
In a nutshell, it means taking a block of code and making it available without executing it.
This block of code can be called later by other parts of your programs, which means that you can defer the execution of that block of code.
For instance, you could pass the block of code as an argument to another method that will execute it later.
As a result, the method’s behavior is parameterized based on that block of code.
For example, if you process a collection, you may want to write a method that.
Here’s an analogy: your roommate knows how to drive to the supermarket and back home.
So you can tell him to buy a list of things such as bread, cheese, and wine.
This is equivalent to calling a method goAndBuy with a list of products as argument.
But one day you’re at the office and you need him to do something he’s never done before: pick up a package from the post office.
You could pass him the list of instructions by email, and when he receives it, he can go ahead and follow the instructions.
You’ve now done something a bit more advanced that’s equivalent to a method: go, which can take different new behaviors as arguments and execute them.
We start the chapter by walking you through an example of how you can evolve your code to be more flexible for changing requirements.
Building on this knowledge, we show how to use behavior parameterization for several real-world examples.
For example, you may have already used the behavior parameterization pattern using existing classes and interfaces in the Java API to sort a List, to filter names of files, or to tell a Thread to execute a block of code or even perform GUI event handling.
You’ll soon realize that using this pattern is verbose in Java at the moment.
Lambda expressions in Java 8 tackle the problem of verbosity.
We show in chapter 3 how to construct lambda expressions, where to use them, and how you can make your code more concise by adopting them.
Writing code that can cope with changing requirements is difficult.
Let’s walk through an example that we’ll gradually improve, showing some best practices for making your code more flexible.
In the context of a farm-inventory application, you have to implement a functionality to filter green apples from a list.
The highlighted line shows the condition required to select green apples.
But now the farmer changes his mind and wants to also filter red apples.
What can you do? A naïve solution would be to duplicate your method, rename it as filterRedApples, and change the if condition to match red apples.
Nonetheless, this approach doesn’t cope well with changes if the farmer wants.
A good principle is this: after writing similar code, try to abstract.
What you could do is add a parameter to your method to parameterize the color and be more flexible to such changes:
You can now make the farmer happy and call your method as follows:
The farmer comes back to you and says, “It would be really cool to differentiate between light apples and heavy apples.
Wearing your software engineering hat, you realize in advance that the farmer may want to vary the weight, so you create the following method to cope with various weights through an additional parameter:
This is a good solution, but notice how you have to duplicate most of the implementation for traversing the inventory and applying the filtering criteria on each apple.
This is somewhat disappointing because it breaks the DRY (don’t repeat yourself) principle of software engineering.
What if you want to alter the filter traversing to enhance performance? You now have to modify the implementation of all of your methods instead of a single one.
You could combine the color and weight into one method called filter.
But then you’d still need a way to differentiate what attribute you want to filter on.
You could add a flag to differentiate between color and weight queries.
Our ugly attempt of merging all attributes appears as follows:
You could use it as follows (but it’s really ugly):
What do true and false mean? In addition, this solution doesn’t cope well with changing requirements.
What if the farmer asks you to filter with different attributes of an apple, for example, its size, its shape, its origin, and so on? Furthermore, what if the farmer asks you for more complicated queries that combine attributes, such as green apples that are also heavy? You’d either have multiple duplicated filter methods or one giant, very complex method.
But in this case what you need is a better way to tell your filterApples method the selection criteria for apples.
In the next section we describe how to make use of behavior parameterization to attain that flexibility.
You saw in the previous section that you need a better way than adding lots of parameters to cope with changing requirements.
Let’s step back and find a better level of abstraction.
We call this a predicate (that is, a function that returns a boolean)
Let’s therefore define an interface to model the selection criteria:
You can now declare multiple implementations of ApplePredicate to represent different selection criteria, for example (and illustrated in figure 2.1):
You can see these criteria as different behaviors for the filter method.
What you just did is related to the strategy design pattern,[1] which lets you define a family of algorithms, encapsulate each algorithm (called a strategy), and select an algorithm at run-time.
In this case the family of algorithms is ApplePredicate and the different strategies are AppleHeavyWeightPredicate and AppleGreenColorPredicate.
But how can you make use of the different implementations of ApplePredicate? You need your filterApples method to accept ApplePredicate objects to test a condition on an Apple.
This is what behavior parameterization means: the ability to tell a method to take multiple behaviors (or strategies) as parameters and use them internally to accomplish different behaviors.
To achieve this in the running example, you add a parameter to the filterApples method to take an ApplePredicate object.
This has a great software engineering benefit: you can now separate the logic of iterating the collection inside the filterApples method with the behavior you want to apply to each element of the collection (in this case a predicate)
Our modified filter method, which uses an ApplePredicate, looks like this:
It’s worth pausing for a moment for a small celebration.
This code is much more flexible than our first attempt, while at the same time it’s easy to read and to use! You can now create different ApplePredicate objects and pass them to the filterApples method.
Your code is now flexible enough for any change of requirements involving the attributes of Apple:
You’ve achieved something really cool: the behavior of the filterApples method depends on the code you pass to it via the ApplePredicate object.
In other words, you’ve parameterized the behavior of the filterApples method!
Note that in the previous example, the only code that really matters is the implementation of the test method, as illustrated in figure 2.2; this is what defines the new behaviors for the filterApples method.
Unfortunately, because the filterApples method can only take objects, you have to wrap that code inside an ApplePredicate object.
Parameterizing the behavior of filterApples and passing different filter strategies.
As we explained earlier, behavior parameterization is great because it enables you to separate the logic of iterating the collection to filter and the behavior to apply on each element of that collection.
As a consequence, you can reuse the same method and give it different behaviors to achieve different things, as illustrated in figure 2.3
This is why behavior parameterization is a useful concept you should have in your toolset for creating flexible APIs.
Parameterizing the behavior of filterApples and passing different filter strategies.
To make sure you feel comfortable with the idea of behavior parameterization, have a go at Quiz 2.1!
Write a prettyPrintApple method that takes a List of Apples and that can be parameterized with multiple ways to generate a String output from an apple (a bit like multiple customized toString methods)
For example, you could tell your pretty-PrintApple method to print only the weight of each apple.
In addition, you could tell your prettyPrintApple method to print each apple individually and mention whether it’s heavy or light.
The solution is similar to the filtering examples we’ve explored so far.
To help you get started, we provide a rough skeleton of the prettyPrintApple method:
First, you need a way to represent a behavior that takes an Apple and returns a formatted String result.
You did something similar when you created an ApplePredicate interface:
You can now represent multiple formatting behaviors by implementing the Apple-Formatter interface:
Finally, you need to tell your prettyPrintApple method to take AppleFormatter objects and use them internally.
You can do this by adding a parameter to prettyPrintApple:
Bingo! You’re now able to pass multiple behaviors to your prettyPrintApple method.
You do this by instantiating implementations of AppleFormatter and giving them as arguments to prettyPrintApple:
You’ve seen that you can abstract over behavior and make your code adapt to requirement changes, but the process is verbose because you need to declare multiple classes that you instantiate only once.
We all know that a feature or concept that’s cumbersome to use will be avoided.
At the moment, when you want to pass new behavior to your filterApples method, you’re forced to declare several classes that implement the ApplePredicate interface and then instantiate several ApplePredicate objects that you allocate only once, as shown in the following listing that summarizes what you’ve seen so far.
There’s a lot of verbosity involved and it’s a time-consuming process!
This is unnecessary overhead; can you do better? Java has a mechanism called anonymous classes, which let you declare and instantiate a class at the same time.
They enable you to improve your code one step further by making it a little more concise.
Section 2.3.3 shows a short preview of how lambda expressions can make your code more readable before we discuss them in detail in the next chapter.
Anonymous classes are like the local classes (a class defined in a block) that you’re already familiar with in Java.
They allow you to declare and instantiate a class at the same time.
In other words, they allow you to create ad hoc implementations.
The following code shows how to rewrite the filtering example by creating an object that implements ApplePredicate using an anonymous class:
Anonymous classes are often used in the context of GUI applications to create event-handler objects (here using the JavaFX API, a modern UI platform for Java):
First, they tend to be very bulky because they take a lot of space, as shown in the highlighted code here using the same two examples used previously:
The answer is 5, because this refers to the enclosing Runnable, not the enclosing class MeaningOfThis.
Verbosity in general is bad; it discourages the use of a language feature because it takes a long time to write and maintain verbose code, and it’s not pleasant to read! Good code should be easy to comprehend at a glance.
Even though anonymous classes somewhat tackle the verbosity associated with declaring multiple concrete classes for an interface, they’re still unsatisfactory.
In the context of passing a simple piece of code (for example, a boolean expression representing a selection criterion), you still have to create an object and explicitly implement a method to define a new behavior (for example, the method test for Predicate or the method handle for EventHandler)
Ideally we’d like to encourage programmers to use the behavior parameterization pattern, because as you’ve just seen, it makes your code more adaptive to requirement changes.
Enough suspense; here’s a short preview of how lambda expressions can help you in your quest for clean code.
The previous code can be rewritten as follows in Java 8 using a lambda expression:
You have to admit this code looks a lot cleaner than our previous attempts! It’s great because it’s starting to look a lot closer to the problem statement.
There’s one more step that you can do in your journey toward abstraction.
At the moment, the filterApples method works only for Apple.
But you can also abstract on the List type to go beyond the problem domain you’re thinking of right now:
You can now use the method filter with a List of bananas, oranges, Integers, or Strings! Here’s an example, using lambda expressions:
You’ve now seen that behavior parameterization is a useful pattern to easily adapt to changing requirements.
This pattern lets you encapsulate a behavior (a piece of code) and parameterize the behavior of methods by passing and using these behaviors you create (for example, different predicates for an Apple)
We mentioned earlier that this approach is similar to the strategy design pattern.
Many methods in the Java API can be parameterized with different behaviors.
We show three examples, which should solidify the idea of passing code for you: sorting with a Comparator, executing a block of code with Runnable, and GUI event handling.
For example, say your farmer wants you to sort the inventory of apples based on their weight.
Sound familiar? Yes, you need a way to represent and use different sorting behaviors to easily adapt to changing requirements.
In Java 8, a List comes with a sort method (you could also use Collections .sort)
The behavior of sort can be parameterized using a java.util.Comparator object, which has the following interface:
You can therefore create different behaviors for the sort method by creating an ad hoc implementation of Comparator.
For example, you can use it to sort the inventory by increasing weight using an anonymous class:
If the farmer changes his mind about how to sort apples, you can create an ad hoc Comparator to match the new requirement and pass it to the sort method! The internal details of how to sort are abstracted away.
Again, don’t worry about this new syntax for now; the next chapter covers in detail how to write and use lambda expressions.
Threads are like a lightweight process: they execute a block of code on their own.
But how can you tell a thread what block of code to run? Several threads may run different code.
What you need is a way to represent a piece of code to be executed later.
In Java, you can use the Runnable interface to represent a block of code to be executed; note that the code will return no result (that is, void):
You can use this interface to create threads with different behaviors as follows:
A typical pattern in GUI programming is to perform an action in response to a certain event such as clicking or hovering over text.
For example, if the user clicks the Send button, you may wish to display a popup or perhaps log the action in a file.
Again, you need a way to cope with changes; you should be able to perform any response.
In JavaFX you can use an EventHandler to represent a response to an event by passing it to setOnAction:
Here, the behavior of the setOnAction method is parameterized with EventHandler objects.
Following are the key concepts you should take away from this chapter:
Behavior parameterization is the ability for a method to take multiple different behaviors as parameters and use them internally to accomplish different behaviors.
Behavior parameterization lets you make your code more adaptive to changing requirements and saves on engineering efforts in the future.
Passing code is a way to give new behaviors as arguments to a method.
Anonymous classes helped a bit before Java 8 to get rid of the verbosity associated with declaring multiple concrete classes for an interface that are needed only once.
The Java API contains many methods that can be parameterized with different behaviors, which include sorting, threads, and GUI handling.
In the previous chapter, you saw that passing code with behavior parameterization is useful for coping with frequent requirement changes in your code.
It lets you define a block of code that represents a behavior and then pass it around.
In general, using this concept you can write code that’s more flexible and reusable.
But you saw that using anonymous classes to represent different behaviors is unsatisfying: it’s verbose, which doesn’t encourage programmers to use behavior parameterization in practice.
In this chapter, we teach you about a new feature in Java 8 that tackles this problem: lambda expressions, which let you represent a behavior or pass code in a concise way.
For now you can think of lambda expressions as anonymous functions, basically methods without declared names, but which can also be passed as arguments to a method as you can with an anonymous class.
We show how to construct them, where to use them, and how you can make your code more concise by using them.
We also explain some new goodies such as type inference and new useful new feature that goes hand in hand with lambda expressions.
This chapter is organized in such a way as to teach you step by step how to write more concise and flexible code.
At the end of this chapter, we bring together all the concepts taught into a concrete example: we take the sorting example shown in chapter 2 and gradually improve it using lambda expressions and method references to make it more concise and readable.
This chapter is important in itself and also because you’ll use lambdas extensively throughout the book.
A lambda expression can be understood as a concise representation of an anonymous function that can be passed around: it doesn’t have a name, but it has a list of parameters, a body, a return type, and also possibly a list of exceptions that can be thrown.
Function—We say function because a lambda isn’t associated with a particular class like a method is.
But like a method, a lambda has a list of parameters, a body, a return type, and a possible list of exceptions that can be thrown.
Passed around— A lambda expression can be passed as argument to a method or stored in a variable.
Concise— You don’t need to write a lot of boilerplate like you do for anonymous classes.
If you’re wondering where the term lambda comes from, it originates from a system developed in academia called lambda calculus, which is used to describe computations.
Why should you care about lambda expressions? You saw in the previous chapter that passing code is currently tedious and verbose in Java.
Well, good news! Lambdas fix this problem: they let you pass code in a concise way.
Lambdas technically don’t let you do anything that you couldn’t do prior to Java 8
But you no longer have to write clumsy code using anonymous classes to benefit from behavior parameterization! Lambda expressions will encourage you to adopt the style of behavior parameterization that we described in the previous chapter.
The net result is that your code will be clearer and more flexible.
For example, using a lambda expression you can create a custom Comparator object in a more concise way.
You must admit that the code looks clearer! Don’t worry if all the parts of the lambda expression don’t make sense yet; we explain all the pieces soon.
For now, note that you’re literally passing only the code that’s really needed to compare two apples using their weight.
It looks like you’re just passing the body of the method compare.
You’ll learn soon that you can simplify your code even more.
We explain in the next section exactly where and how you can use lambda expressions.
The lambda we just showed you has three parts, as shown in figure 3.1:
A lambda expression is composed of parameters, an arrow, and a body.
The body of the lambda— Compare two Apples using their weights.
To illustrate further, the following listing shows five examples of valid lambda expressions in Java 8
This syntax was chosen by the Java language designers because it was well received in other languages such as C# and Scala, which have a similar feature.
As you can see, lambda expressions follow a simple syntax.
Working through Quiz 3.1 should let you know if you understand the pattern.
Based on the syntax rules just shown, which of the following are not valid lambda expressions?
This lambda has no parameters and returns a String as an expression.
This lambda has no parameters and returns a String (using an explicit return statement)
To make this lambda valid, you can remove the curly braces and semicolon as follows: (String s) -> "Iron Man"
Table 3.1 provides a list of example lambdas with examples of use cases.
You may now be wondering where you’re allowed to use lambda expressions.
In the previous example, you assigned a lambda to a variable of type Comparator<Apple>
You could also use another lambda with the filter method you implemented in the previous chapter:
So where exactly can you use lambdas? You can use a lambda expression in the context of a functional interface.
In the code shown here, you can pass a lambda as second argument to the method filter because it expects a Predicate<T>, which is a functional interface.
In a nutshell, a functional interface is an interface that specifies exactly one abstract method.
You already know several other functional interfaces in the Java API such as Comparator and Runnable, which we explored in chapter 2:
You’ll see in chapter 9 that interfaces can now also have default methods (that is, a method with a body that provides some default implementation for a method in case it isn’t implemented by a.
An interface is still a functional interface if it has many default methods as long as it specifies only one abstract method.
To check your understanding, Quiz 3.2 should let you know if you grasp the concept of a functional interface.
SmartAdder isn’t a functional interface because it specifies two abstract methods called add (one is inherited from Adder)
Nothing isn’t a functional interface because it declares no abstract method at all.
What can you do with functional interfaces? Lambda expressions let you provide the implementation of the abstract method of a functional interface directly inline and treat the whole expression as an instance of a functional interface (more technically speaking, an instance of a concrete implementation of the functional interface)
You can achieve the same thing with an anonymous inner class, although it’s clumsier: you provide an implementation.
The following code is valid because Runnable is a functional interface defining only one abstract method, run:
The signature of the abstract method of the functional interface essentially describes the signature of the lambda expression.
For example, the Runnable interface can be viewed as the signature of a function that accepts nothing and returns nothing (void) because it has only one abstract method called run, which accepts nothing and returns nothing (void).[1]
Some languages such as Scala provide explicit type annotations in their type system to describe the type of a function (called function types)
Java reuses existing nominal types provided by functional interfaces and maps them into a form of function types behind the scenes.
We use a special notation throughout the chapter to describe the signatures of lambdas and parameters returning void.
As another example, (Apple, Apple) -> int denotes a function taking two Apples as parameters and returning an int.
You may already be wondering how lambda expressions are type checked.
We detail how the compiler checks whether a lambda is valid in a given context in section 3.5
For now, it suffices to understand that a lambda expression can be assigned to a variable or passed to a method expecting a functional interface as argument, provided the lambda expression has the same signature as the abstract method of the functional interface.
For instance, in our earlier example, you could pass a lambda directly to the process method as follows:
This is exactly the signature of the run method defined in the Runnable interface.
But they chose this way because it fits naturally without increasing the complexity of the language.
In addition, most Java programmers are already familiar with the idea of an interface with a single abstract method (for example, with event handling)
Try Quiz 3.3 to test your knowledge of where lambdas can be used.
Which of the following are valid uses of lambda expressions?
Note that running this code will do nothing because the body of the lambda is empty!
Indeed, the return type of the method fetch is -> String, the lambda can be used in this context.
If you explore the new Java API, you’ll notice that functional interfaces are annotated with interfaces in depth)
This annotation is used to indicate that the interface is intended to be a functional interface.
The compiler will return a meaningful error if you define an interface using the @FunctionalInterface annotation and it isn’t a functional interface.
Note that the @FunctionalInterface annotation isn’t mandatory, but it’s good practice to use it when an interface is designed for that purpose.
You can think of it like the @Override notation to indicate that a method is overridden.
Let’s look at an example of how lambdas, together with behavior parameterization, can be used in practice to make your code more flexible and concise.
A recurrent pattern in resource processing (for example, dealing with files or databases) is to open a resource, do some processing on it, and then close the resource.
The setup and cleanup phases are always similar and surround the important code doing the processing.
This is called the execute around pattern, as illustrated in figure 3.2
For example, in the following code, the highlighted lines show the boilerplate code required to read one line from a file (note also that you use Java 7’s try-with-resources statement, which already simplifies the code, because you don’t have to close the resource explicitly):
Tasks A and B are surrounded by the same redundant code responsible for preparation/cleanup.
You can read only the first line of the file.
What if you’d like to return the first two lines instead or even the word used most frequently? Ideally, you’d like to reuse the code doing setup and cleanup and tell the processFile method to perform different actions on the file.
Does this sound familiar? Yes, you need to parameterize the behavior of processFile.
You need a way to pass behavior to processFile so it can execute different behaviors using a BufferedReader.
So what should the new processFile method look like if you wanted to read two lines at once? You basically need a lambda that takes a BufferedReader and returns a String.
For example, here’s how to print two lines of a BufferedReader:
We explained earlier that lambdas can be used only in the context of a functional interface.
You need to create one that matches the signature BufferedReader -> String and that may throw an IOException.
You can now use this interface as the argument to your new processFile method:
Any lambdas of the form BufferedReader -> String can be passed as arguments, because they match the signature of the process method defined in the Buffered-ReaderProcessor interface.
You now need only a way to execute the code represented by the lambda inside the body of processFile.
Remember, lambda expressions let you provide the implementation of the abstract method of a functional interface directly inline, and they treat the whole expression as an instance of a functional interface.
You can therefore call the method process on the resulting BufferedReaderProcessor object inside the processFile body to perform the processing:
You can now reuse the processFile method and process files in different ways by passing different lambdas.
Figure 3.3 summarizes the four steps taken to make the processFile method more flexible.
So far, we’ve showed how you can make use of functional interfaces to pass lambdas.
In the next section we explore new interfaces that were added to Java 8 that you can reuse to pass multiple different lambdas.
As you learned in section 3.2.1, a functional interface specifies exactly one abstract method.
Functional interfaces are useful because the signature of the abstract method can describe the signature of a lambda expression.
The signature of the abstract method of a functional interface is called a function descriptor.
So in order to use different lambda expressions, you need a set of functional interfaces that can describe common function descriptors.
There are several functional interfaces already available in the Java API such as Comparable, Runnable, and Callable, which you saw in section 3.2
The Java library designers for Java 8 have helped you by introducing several new functional interfaces inside the java.util.function package.
We describe the interfaces Predicate, Consumer, and Function next, and a more complete list is available in table 3.2 at the end of this section.
The java.util.function.Predicate<T> interface defines an abstract method named test that accepts an object of generic type T and returns a boolean.
It’s exactly the same one that you created earlier, but is available out of the box! You might want to use this interface when you need to represent a boolean expression that uses an object of type T.
For example, you can define a lambda that accepts String objects, as shown in the following listing.
If you look up the Javadoc specification of the Predicate interface, you may notice additional methods such as and and or.
The java.util.function.Consumer<T> interface defines an abstract method named accept that takes an object of generic type T and returns no result (void)
You might use this interface when you need to access an object of type T and perform some operations on it.
For example, you can use it to create a method forEach, which takes a list of Integers and applies an operation on each element of that list.
In the following listing you use this forEach method combined with a lambda to print all the elements of the list.
In the listing that follows we show how you can use it to create a method map to transform a list of Strings into a list of Integers containing the length of each String.
There are also functional interfaces that are specialized with certain types.
To refresh a little: every Java type is either a reference type (for example, Byte, Integer, Object, List) or a primitive type (for example, int, double, byte, char)
But generic parameters (for example, the T in Consumer<T>) can be bound only to reference types.
This is due to how generics are internally implemented.[2] As a result, in Java there’s a mechanism to convert a primitive type into a corresponding reference type.
The opposite approach (that is, converting a reference type into a corresponding primitive type) is called unboxing.
Java also has an autoboxing mechanism to facilitate the task for programmers: boxing and unboxing operations are done automatically.
For example, this is why the following code is valid (an int gets boxed to an Integer):
Some other languages such as C# don’t have this restriction.
Boxed values are essentially a wrapper around primitive types and are stored on the heap.
Therefore, boxed values use more memory and require additional memory lookups to fetch the wrapped primitive value.
Java 8 brings a specialized version of the functional interfaces we described earlier in order to avoid autoboxing operations when the inputs or outputs are primitives.
In general, the names of functional interfaces that have a specialization for the input type parameter are preceded by the appropriate primitive type, for example, DoublePredicate, IntConsumer, LongBinaryOperator, IntFunction, and so on.
The Function interface has also variants for the output type parameter: ToIntFunction<T>, IntTo-DoubleFunction, and so on.
Table 3.2 gives a summary of the most commonly used functional interfaces available in the Java API and their function descriptors.
The left side of the table is a list representing the types of the arguments.
In this case it represents a function with two arguments of respectively generic type T and U and that has a return type of R.
You’ve now seen a lot of functional interfaces that can be used to describe the signature of various lambda expressions.
To check your understanding so far, have a go at Quiz 3.4
As a further exercise, come up with valid lambda expressions that you can use with these functional interfaces.
IntBinaryOperator has a single abstract method called applyAsInt representing a function descriptor (int, int) -> int.
Alternatively, Callable<T> also has a single abstract method called call representing a.
To summarize the discussion about functional interfaces and lambdas, table 3.3 provides a summary of use cases, examples of lambdas, and functional interfaces that can be used.
Note that none of the functional interfaces allow for a checked exception to be thrown.
You have two options if you need a lambda expression to throw an exception: define your own functional interface that declares the checked exception, or wrap the lambda with a try/catch block.
For example, in section 3.3 we introduced a new functional interface Buffered-ReaderProcessor that explicitly declared an IOException:
In this case you can explicitly catch the checked exception:
You’ve now seen how to create lambdas and where and how to use them.
Next, we explain some more advanced details: how lambdas are type checked by the compiler and rules you should be aware of, such as lambdas referencing local variables inside their body and void-compatible lambdas.
There’s no need to fully understand the next section right away, and you may wish to come back to it later and move on to section 3.6 about method references.
When we first mentioned lambda expressions, we said that they let you generate an instance of a functional interface.
Nonetheless, a lambda expression itself doesn’t contain the information about which functional interface it’s implementing.
In order to have a more formal understanding of lambda expressions, you should know what the actual type of a lambda is.
The type of a lambda is deduced from the context in which the lambda is used.
The type expected for the lambda expression inside the context (for example, a method parameter that it’s passed to or a local variable that it’s assigned to) is called the target type.
Let’s look at an example to see what happens behind the scenes when you use a lambda expression.
Figure 3.4 summarizes the type-checking process for the following code:
Second, it expects as the second formal parameter an object of type Predicate-<Apple> (the target.
Third, Predicate<Apple> is a functional interface defining a single abstract method called test.
Fourth, the method test describes a function descriptor that accepts an Apple and returns a.
Finally, any actual argument to the filtermethod needs to match this requirement.
The code is valid because the lambda expression that we’re passing also takes an Apple as parameter and returns a boolean.
Note that if the lambda expression were throwing an exception, then the declared throws clause of the abstract method would also have to match.
Because of the idea of target typing, the same lambda expression can be associated with different functional interfaces if they have a compatible abstract method signature.
For example, both interfaces Callable and PrivilegedAction described earlier represent functions that accept nothing and return a generic type T.
In table 3.3 we showed a similar example; the same lambda can be used with multiple different functional interfaces:
A given class instance expression can appear in two or more different contexts, and the appropriate type argument will be inferred as exemplified here:
If a lambda has a statement expression as its body, it’s compatible with a function descriptor that returns void (provided the parameter list is compatible too)
For example, both of the following lines are legal even though the method add of a List returns a boolean and not void as expected in the Consumer context (T -> void):
Predicate has a boolean return // Consumer has a void return.
By now you should have a good understanding of when and where you’re allowed to use lambda expressions.
They can get their target type from an assignment context, method invocation context (parameters and return), and a cast context.
The context of the lambda expression is Object (the target type)
To fix this you can change the target type to Runnable, which represents a function.
You’ve seen how the target type can be used to check whether a lambda can be used in a particular context.
It can also be used to do something slightly different: infer the types of the parameters of a lambda.
The Java compiler deduces what functional interface to associate with a lambda expression from its surrounding context (the target type), meaning it can also deduce an appropriate signature for the lambda because the function descriptor is available through the target type.
The benefit is that the compiler has access to the types of the parameters of a lambda expression, and they can be omitted in the lambda syntax.
In other words, the Java compiler infers the types of the parameters of a lambda as shown here:[3]
Note that when a lambda has just one parameter whose type is inferred, the parentheses surrounding the parameter name can also be omitted.
The benefits of code readability are more noticeable with lambda expressions that have several parameters.
Note that sometimes it’s more readable to include the types explicitly and sometimes more readable to exclude them.
There’s no rule for which way is better; developers must make their own choices about what makes their code more readable.
All the lambda expressions we’ve shown so far used only their arguments inside their body.
But lambda expressions are also allowed to use free variables (variables that aren’t the parameters and defined in an outer scope) just like anonymous classes can.
Nonetheless, there’s a small twist: there are some restrictions on what you can do with these variables.
Lambdas are allowed to capture (that is, to reference in their bodies) instance variables and static variables without restrictions.
In other words, lambda expressions can capture local variables that are assigned to them only once.
Note: capturing an instance variable can be seen as capturing the final local variable this.) For example, the following code doesn’t compile because the variable portNumber is assigned to twice:
You may be asking yourself why local variables have these restrictions.
First, there’s a key difference in how instance and local variables are implemented behind the scenes.
Instance variables are stored on the heap, whereas local variables live on the stack.
If a lambda could access the local variable directly and the lambda were used in a thread, then the thread using the lambda could try to access the variable after the thread that allocated the variable had deallocated it.
Hence, Java implements access to a free local variable as access to a copy of it rather than access to the original variable.
This makes no difference if the local variable is assigned to only once—hence the restriction.
Second, this restriction also discourages typical imperative programming patterns (which, as we explain in later chapters, prevent easy parallelization) that mutate an outer variable.
You may have heard of the term closure and may be wondering whether lambdas meet the definition of a closure (not to be confused with the Clojure programming language)
To put it scientifically, a closure is an instance of a function that can reference nonlocal variables of that function with no restrictions.
For example, a closure could be passed as argument to another function.
It could also access and modify variables defined outside its scope.
Now Java 8 lambdas and anonymous classes do something similar to closures: they can be passed as argument to methods and can access variables outside their scope.
But they have a restriction: they can’t modify the content of local variables of a method in which the lambda is defined.
It helps to think that lambdas close over values rather than variables.
As explained previously, this restriction exists because local variables live on the stack and are implicitly confined to the thread they’re in.
Allowing capture of mutable local variables opens new thread-unsafe possibilities, which are undesirable (instance variables are fine because they live on the heap, which is shared across threads)
We now describe another feature that you’ll see in Java 8 code: method references.
Method references let you reuse existing method definitions and pass them just like lambdas.
In some cases they appear more readable and feel more natural than using lambda expressions.
Why should you care about method references? Method references can be seen as shorthand for lambdas calling only a specific method.
Indeed, a method reference lets you create a lambda expression from an existing method implementation.
But by referring to a method name explicitly, your code can gain better readability.
How does it work? When you need a method reference, the target reference is placed before the delimiter :: and the name of the method is provided after it.
For example, Apple::getWeight is a method reference to the method getWeight defined in the Apple class.
Remember that no brackets are needed because you’re not actually calling the method.
The gives a couple more examples of possible method references in Java 8
You can think of method references as syntactic sugar for lambdas that refer only to a single method because you write less to express the same thing.
A method reference to an instance method of an arbitrary type (for example, the method length of a String, written String::length)
A method reference to an instance method of an existing object (for example, suppose you have a local variable expensiveTransaction that holds an object of type Transaction, which supports an instance method getValue; you can write expensiveTransaction::getValue)
The second and third kinds of method references may be a bit overwhelming at first.
The idea with the second kind of method references such as String::length is that you’re referring to a method to an object that will be supplied as one of the parameters of the lambda.
For example, But the third kind of method references refers to a situation when you’re calling a method in a.
The shorthand rules to refactor a lambda expression to an equivalent method reference follow simple recipes, shown in figure 3.5
Recipes for constructing method references for three different types of lambda expressions.
Note that there are also special forms of method references for constructors, array constructors, and super-calls.
Say you’d like to sort a List of strings, ignoring case differences.
The sort method on a List expects a Comparator as parameter.
You saw earlier that Comparator describes a function descriptor with the signature (T, T) -> int.
You can define a lambda expression that leverages the method compareToIgnoreCase in the String class as follows (note that compareToIgnoreCase is predefined in the String class):
The lambda expression has a signature compatible with the function descriptor of Comparator.
Using the recipes described previously, the example can also be written using a method reference as follows:
Note that the compiler goes through a similar type-checking process as for lambda expressions to figure out whether a method reference is valid with a given functional interface: the signature of the method reference has to match the type of the context.
To check your understanding of method references, have a go at Quiz 3.6!
What are equivalent method references for the following lambda expressions?
This lambda expression forwards its argument to the static method parseInt of Integer.
This method takes a String to parse and returns an Integer.
As a result, the lambda can be rewritten using recipe from figure 3.5 (lambda expressions calling a static method) as follows:
This lambda uses its first argument to call the method contains on it.
Because the first argument is of type List, you can use recipe from figure 3.5 as follows:
So far we showed only how to reuse existing method implementations and create method references.
But you can do something similar with constructors of a class.
You can create a reference to an existing constructor using its name and the keyword new as follows: ClassName::new.
It works similarly to a reference to a static method.
If you have a constructor with signature Apple(Integer weight), it fits the signature of the Function interface, so you can do this,
In the following code, each element of a List of Integers is passed to the constructor of Apple using a similar map method we defined earlier, resulting in a List of apples with different weights:
If you have a two-argument constructor, Apple(String color, Integer weight), it fits the signature of the BiFunction interface, so you can do this,
The capability of referring to a constructor without instantiating it enables interesting applications.
For example, you can use a Map to associate constructors with a string value.
You can then create a method giveMeFruit that, given a String and an Integer, can create different types of fruits with different weights:
To check your understanding of method and constructor references, try out Quiz 3.7
You saw how to transform zero-, one-, and two-argument constructors into constructor references.
What would you need to do in order to use a constructor reference for a three-argument constructor such as Color(int, int, int)?
You saw that the syntax for a constructor reference is ClassName::new, so in this case it’s Color::new.
But you need a functional interface that will match the signature of that constructor reference.
Because there isn’t one in the functional interface starter set, you can create your own:
And you can now use the constructor reference as follows:
We’ve gone through a lot of new information: lambdas, functional interfaces, and method references.
We put it all into practice in the next section!
To wrap up this chapter and all we’ve discussed on lambdas, we continue with our initial problem of sorting a list of Apples with different ordering strategies and show how you can progressively evolve a naïve solution into a concise solution, using all the concepts and features explained so far in the book: behavior parameterization, anonymous classes, lambda expressions, and method references.
The final solution we work toward is this (note that all source code is available on the book’s web page):
You’re lucky; the Java 8 API already provides you with a sort method available on List so you don’t have to implement it.
It expects a Comparator object as argument to compare two Apples! This is how you can pass different strategies in Java: they have to be wrapped in an object.
We say that the behavior of sort is parameterized: its behavior will be different based on different ordering strategies passed to it.
Rather than implementing Comparator for the purpose of instantiating it once, you saw that you could use an anonymous class to improve your solution:
Java 8 introduces lambda expressions, which provide a lightweight syntax to achieve the same goal: passing code.
You saw that a lambda expression can be used where a functional interface is expected.
As a reminder, a functional interface is an interface defining only one abstract method.
The signature of the abstract method (called function descriptor) can describe the signature of a lambda expression.
In this case, the Comparator represents a function descriptor (T, T) -> int.
Because you’re using apples, it represents more specifically (Apple, Apple) -> int.
We explained that the Java compiler could infer the types of the parameters of a lambda expression by using the context in which the lambda appears.
It can be used as follows (note that you now pass a lambda with only one argument: the lambda specifies how to extract the key to compare with from an apple):
You can now rewrite your solution in a slightly more compact form:
We explained that method references are syntactic sugar for lambda expressions that forwards their arguments.
You can use a method reference to make your code slightly less verbose (assuming a static import of java.util.Comparator.comparing):
Several functional interfaces in the Java 8 API contain convenient methods.
Specifically, many functional interfaces such as Comparator, Function, and Predicate that are used to pass lambda expressions provide methods that allow composition.
What does this mean? In practice it means you can combine several simple lambda expressions to build more complicated ones.
For example, you can combine two predicates into a larger predicate that performs an or operation between the two predicates.
Moreover, you can also compose functions such that the result of one becomes the input of another function.
You may wonder how it’s possible that there are additional methods in a functional interface.
After all, this goes against the definition of a functional interface!) The trick is that the methods that we’ll introduce are called default methods (that is, they’re not abstract methods)
For now, just trust us and read chapter 9 later when you want to find out more about default methods and what you can do with them.
You’ve seen that you can use the static method Comparator.comparing to return a Comparator based on a Function that extracts a key for comparison as follows:
What if you wanted to sort the apples by decreasing weight? There’s no need to create a different instance of a Comparator.
The interface includes a default method reverse that imposes the.
So you can simply modify the previous example to sort the apples by decreasing weight by reusing the initial Comparator:
For example, after two apples are compared based on their weight, you may want to sort them by country of origin.
It takes a function as parameter (just like the method comparing) and provides a second Comparator if two objects are considered equal using the initial Comparator.
The Predicate interface includes three methods that let you reuse an existing Predicate to create more complicated ones: negate, and, and or.
For example, you can use the method negate to return the negation of a Predicate, such as an apple that is not red:
You may want to combine two lambdas to say that an apple is both red and heavy with the and method:
You can combine the resulting predicate one step further to express apples that are red and heavy (above 150 g) or just green apples:
Finally, you can also compose lambda expressions represented by the Function interface.
The Function interface comes with two default methods for this, andThen and compose, which both return an instance of Function.
The method andThen returns a function that first applies a given function to an input and then applies another function to the result of that application.
You can also use the method compose similarly to first apply the function given as argument to compose and then apply the function to the result.
For example, in the previous example using compose, it would mean f(g(x)) instead of g(f(x)) using andThen:
How can you use these in practice? Let’s say you have various utility methods that do text transformation on a letter represented as a String:
You can now create various transformation pipelines by composing the utility methods, for example, creating a pipeline that first adds a header, then checks spelling, and finally adds a footer, as illustrated in figure 3.7:
A second pipeline might be only adding a header and footer without checking for spelling:
If you feel comfortable with school mathematics, then this section gives another viewpoint of the idea of lambda expressions and passing around functions.
Feel free to just skip it; nothing else in the book depends on it, but you may enjoy seeing another perspective.
Suppose you have a (mathematical, not Java) function f, perhaps defined by.
Then, one question that’s often asked (at school, in engineering degrees) is that of finding the area beneath the function when drawn on paper (counting the x-axis as the zero line)
In this example, the function f is a straight line, and so you can easily work out this area by the trapezium method (essentially drawing triangles) to discover the solution:
Now, how might you express this in Java? Your first problem is reconciling the strange notation like the integration symbol or dy/dx with familiar programming language notation.
Thus, you want to write in Java something that looks like this, where the function f is just passed around:
First, the scope of x is unclear, and second, this would pass a value of x+10 to integrate instead of passing the function f.
The idea is that you’re passing the code for f to the method integrate.
You may now wonder how you’d write the method integrate itself.
Continue to suppose that f is a linear function (straight line)
You’d probably like to write in a form similar to mathematics:
But because lambda expressions can be used only in a context expecting a functional interface (in this case, Function), you have to write it this way:
Following are the key concepts you should take away from this chapter:
A lambda expression can be understood as a kind of anonymous function: it doesn’t have a name, but it has a list of parameters, a body, a return type, and also possibly a list of exceptions that can be thrown.
A functional interface is an interface that declares exactly one abstract method.
Lambda expressions can be used only where a functional interface is expected.
Lambda expressions let you provide the implementation of the abstract method of a functional.
Java 8 comes with a list of common functional interfaces in the java.util .function package, which.
The execute around pattern (that is, you need to execute a bit of behavior in the middle of code that’s always required in a method, for example, resource allocation and cleanup) can be used with lambdas to gain additional flexibility and reusability.
The type expected for a lambda expression is called the target type.
Method references let you reuse an existing method implementation and pass it around directly.
Functional interfaces such as Comparator, Predicate, and Function have several default methods.
Functional-style data processing The second part of this book is a deep exploration of the new Streams API, which lets you write powerful code that processes a collection of data in a declarative way.
By the end of this second part, you’ll have a full understanding of what streams are and how you can use them in your codebase to process a collection of data concisely and efficiently.
Chapter 4 introduces the concept of a stream and explains how it compares with a collection.
Chapter 5 investigates in detail the stream operations available to express sophisticated data processing queries.
You’ll look at many patterns such as filtering, slicing, finding, matching, mapping, and reducing.
In chapter 7, you’ll learn about how streams can automatically run in parallel and leverage your multicore architectures.
In addition, you’ll learn about various pitfalls to avoid when using parallel streams correctly and effectively.
What would you do without collections? Nearly every Java application makes and processes collections.
Collections are fundamental to many programming tasks: they let you group and process data.
To illustrate collections in action, imagine you want to create a collection of dishes to represent a menu and then iterate through it to sum the calories of each dish.
You may want to process the collection to select only low-calorie dishes for a special healthy menu.
But despite collections being necessary for almost any Java application, manipulating collections is far from perfect:
Much business logic entails database-like operations such as grouping a list of dishes by category (for example, all vegetarian dishes) or finding the most expensive dish.
How many times do you find yourself reimplementing these operations using iterators? Most databases let you specify such operations declaratively.
As you can see, you don’t need to implement how to filter using the attributes of a dish (for example, using an iterator and an accumulator)
How would you process a large collection of elements? To gain performance you’d need to process it in parallel and leverage multicore architectures.
But writing parallel code is complicated in comparison to working with iterators.
So what could the Java language designers do to save your precious time and make your life easier as programmers? You may have guessed: the answer is streams.
Streams are an update to the Java API that lets you manipulate collections of data in a declarative way (you express a query rather than code an ad hoc implementation for it)
Its only purpose is to act as an intermediate throwaway container.
In Java 8, this implementation detail is pushed into the library where it belongs.
To exploit a multicore architecture and execute this code in parallel, you need only change.
You may be wondering what exactly happens when you call the method parallelStream.
For now, you can see that the new approach offers several immediate benefits from a software engineering point of view:
The code is written in a declarative way: you specify what you want to achieve (that is, filter dishes that are low in calories) as opposed to specifying how to implement an operation (using control-flow blocks such as loops and if conditions)
As you saw in the previous chapter, this approach, together with behavior parameterization, enables you to cope with changing requirements: you could easily create an additional version of your code to filter high-calorie dishes using a lambda expression, without having to copy and paste code.
You chain together several building-block operations to express a complicated data processing pipeline (you chain the filter by linking sorted, map, and collect operations, as illustrated in figure 4.1) while keeping your code readable and its intent clear.
The result of the filter is passed to the sortedmethod, which is then passed to themapmethod and then to the collectmethod.
Because operations such as filter (or sorted, map, and collect) are available as high-level building blocks that don’t depend on a specific threading model, their internal implementation could be single-threaded or potentially maximize your multicore architecture transparently! In practice, this means you no longer have to worry about threads and locks to figure out how to parallelize certain data processing tasks: the Streams API does it for you!
Now try to think how you’d implement this with the typical imperative programming approach using loops.
Embrace the power of streams in this and the following chapters!
There have been many attempts at providing Java programmers with better libraries to manipulate collections.
For example, Guava is a popular library created by Google.
It provides additional container classes such as multimaps and multisets.
Finally, lambdaj, written by Mario Fusco, coauthor of this book, provides many utilities to manipulate collections in a declarative manner, inspired by functional programming.
Now Java 8 comes with its own official library for manipulating collections in a more declarative style.
To summarize, the Streams API in Java 8 lets you write code that’s.
For the remainder of this chapter and the next, we’ll use the following domain for our examples: a menu that’s nothing more than a list of dishes.
We’ll now explore how you can use the Streams API in more detail.
In the next chapter, we’ll investigate in detail the stream operations available to express sophisticated data processing queries.
We’ll look at many patterns such as filtering, slicing, finding, matching, mapping, and reducing.
There will be many quizzes and exercises to try to solidify your understanding.
Next, we’ll discuss how you can create and manipulate numeric streams, for example, to generate a stream of even numbers or Pythagorean triples! Finally, we’ll discuss how you can create streams from different sources such as from a file.
We start our discussion of streams with collections, because that’s the simplest way to begin working with streams.
Collections in Java 8 support a new stream method that returns a stream (the interface definition is available in java.util.stream.Stream)
You’ll later see that you can also get streams in various other ways (for example, generating stream elements from a numeric range or from I/O resources)
Sequence of elements— Like a collection, a stream provides an interface to a sequenced set of values of a specific element type.
Because collections are data structures, they’re mostly about storing and accessing elements with specific time/space complexities (for example, an ArrayList vs.
But streams are about expressing computations such as filter, sorted, and map that you saw earlier.
We explain this idea in greater detail in the coming sections.
Source— Streams consume from a data-providing source such as collections, arrays, or I/O resources.
Note that generating a stream from an ordered collection preserves the ordering.
The elements of a stream coming from a list will have the same order as the list.
Data processing operations— Streams support database-like operations and common operations from functional programming languages to manipulate data, such as filter, map, reduce, find, match, sort, and so on.
Stream operations can be executed either sequentially or in parallel.
Pipelining— Many stream operations return a stream themselves, allowing operations to be chained and form a larger pipeline.
This enables certain optimizations that we explain in the next chapter, such as laziness and short-circuiting.
A pipeline of operations can be viewed as a database-like query on the data source.
Internal iteration— In contrast to collections, which are iterated explicitly using an iterator, stream operations do the iteration behind the scenes for you.
We briefly mentioned this idea in chapter 1 and return to it later in the next section.
Let’s look at a code example to explain all of these ideas:
In this example, you first get a stream from the list of dishes by calling the stream method on menu.
The data source is the list of dishes (the menu) and it provides a sequence of elements to the stream.
Next, you apply a series of data processing operations on the stream: filter, map, limit, and collect.
All these operations except collect return another stream so they can be connected to form a pipeline, which can be viewed as a query on the source.
Finally, the collect operation starts processing the pipeline to return a result (it’s different because it returns something other than a stream—here, a List)
No result is produced, and indeed no element from menu is even selected, until collect is invoked.
You can think of it as if the method invocations in the chain are queued up until collect is called.
Figure 4.2 shows the sequence of stream operations: filter, map, limit, and collect, each of which is briefly described here:
Filtering a menu using a stream to find out three high-calorie dish names.
In this case, you extract the name for each dish by passing the method reference Dish::getName, which is.
In this case you convert the stream into a list.
At the moment, you can see collect as an operation that takes as an argument various recipes for accumulating the elements of.
Notice how the code we just described is very different than what you’d write if you were to process the list of menu items step by step.
First, you use a much more declarative style to process the data in the menu where you say what needs to be done: “Find names of three.
As a result, the Streams API has more flexibility to decide how to optimize this pipeline.
For example, the filtering, extracting, and truncating steps could be merged into a single pass and stop as soon as three dishes are found.
We show an example to demonstrate that in the next chapter.
Let’s now stand back a little and examine the conceptual differences between the Collections API and the new Streams API, before we explore in more detail what operations you can perform with a stream.
Both the existing Java notion of collections and the new notion of streams provide interfaces to data structures representing a sequenced set of values of the element type.
By sequenced, we mean that we commonly step through the values in turn rather than randomly accessing them in any order.
This is a collection (perhaps of bytes or of frames—we don’t care which here) because it contains the whole data structure.
Now consider watching the same video when it’s being streamed over the internet.
The streaming video player needs to have downloaded only a few frames in advance of where the user is watching, so you can start displaying values from the beginning of the stream before most of the values in the stream have even been computed (consider streaming a live football game)
Note particularly that the video player may lack the memory to buffer the whole stream in memory as a collection—and the startup time would be appalling if you had to wait for the final frame to appear before you could start showing the video.
You might choose for video-player implementation reasons to buffer a part of a stream into a collection, but this is distinct from the conceptual difference.
In coarsest terms, the difference between collections and streams has to do with when things are computed.
A collection is an in-memory data structure that holds all the values the data structure currently has—every element in the collection has to be computed before it can be added to the collection.
You can add things to, and remove them from, the collection, but at each moment in time, every element in the collection is stored in memory; elements have to be computed before becoming part of the collection.)
By contrast, a stream is a conceptually fixed data structure (you can’t add or remove elements from it) whose elements are computed on demand.
In chapter 6 we show how simple it is to construct a stream containing all the prime.
Another view is that a stream is like a lazily constructed collection: values are computed when they’re solicited by a consumer (in management speak this is demand-driven, or even just-in-time, manufacturing)
In contrast, a collection is eagerly constructed (supplier-driven: fill your warehouse before you start selling, like a Christmas novelty that has a limited life)
Applying this to the primes example, attempting to construct a collection of all prime numbers would result in a program loop that forever computes a new prime, adding it to the collection, but of course could never finish making the collection, so the consumer would never get to see it.
Figure 4.3 illustrates the difference between a stream and a collection applied to our DVD vs.
Suppose you search for a phrase with many matches in Google or in an e-commerce online shop.
When you, the consumer, click for the next 10, the supplier computes these on demand, before returning them to your browser for display.
Note that, similarly to iterators, a stream can be traversed only once.
You can get a new stream from the initial data source to traverse it again just like for an iterator (assuming it’s a repeatable source like a collection; if it’s an I/O channel, you’re out of luck)
For example, the following code would throw an exception indicating the stream has been consumed:
So keep in mind that you can consume a stream only once!
For readers who like philosophical viewpoints, you can see a stream as a set of values spread out in time.
In contrast, a collection is a set of values spread out in space (here, computer memory), which all exist at a single point in time—and which you access using an iterator to access members inside a for-each loop.
Another key difference between collections and streams is how they manage the iteration over data.
Using the Collection interface requires iteration to be done by the user (for example, using iteration—it does the iteration for you and takes care of storing the resulting stream value somewhere; you merely provide a function saying what’s to be done.
Note that the for-each hides some of the iteration complexity.
The for-each construct is syntactic sugar that translates into something much uglier using an Iterator object.
Let’s use an analogy to understand the differences and benefits of internal iteration.
Let’s say you’re talking to your two-year-old daughter, Sofia, and want her to put her toys away:
This is exactly what you do every day with your Java collections.
You iterate a collection externally, explicitly pulling out and processing the items one by one.
It would be far better if you could just tell Sofia, “Put all the toys that are on the floor inside the box.” There are two other reasons why an internal iteration is preferable: first, Sofia could choose to take at the same time the doll with one hand and the ball with the other, and second, she could decide to take the objects closest to the box first and then the others.
In the same way, using an internal iteration, the processing of items could be transparently done in parallel or in a different order that may be more optimized.
These optimizations are difficult if you iterate the collection externally as you’re used to doing in Java.
By contrast, once you’ve chosen external iteration by writing for-each, then you’ve essentially committed to self-manage any parallelism.
Specifically, streams make use of internal iteration: iteration is taken care of for you.
But this is useful only if you have a list of predefined operations to work with (for example, filter or map) that hide the iteration.
Most of these operations take lambda expressions as arguments so you can parameterize their behavior as we showed in the previous chapter.
The Java language designers shipped the Streams API with an extensive list of operations you can use to express complicated data processing queries.
We’ll briefly look at this list of operations now and explore them in more detail with examples in the next chapter.
Stream operations that can be connected are called intermediate operations, and operations that close a stream are called terminal operations.
Intermediate operations such as filter or sorted return another stream as the return type.
This allows the operations to be connected to form a query.
What’s important is that intermediate operations don’t perform any processing until a terminal operation is invoked on the stream pipeline—they’re lazy.
This is because intermediate operations can usually be merged and processed into a single pass by the terminal operation.
To understand what’s happening in the stream pipeline, modify the code so each lambda also prints the current dish it’s processing (like many demonstration and debugging techniques, this is appalling programming style for production code but directly explains the order of evaluation when you’re learning):
You can notice several optimizations due to the lazy nature of streams.
Second, despite the fact that filter and map are two separate operations, they were merged into the same pass (we call this technique loop fusion)
A result is any nonstream value such as a List, an Integer, or even void.
For example, in the following pipeline, forEach is a terminal operation that returns void and applies a lambda to each dish in the source.
Passing System.out.println to forEach asks it to print every Dish in the stream created from menu:
To check your understanding of intermediate versus terminal operations, try out Quiz 4.1
In the stream pipeline that follows, can you identify the intermediate and terminal operations?
The last operation in the stream pipeline count returns a long, which is a non-Stream value.
All previous operations, filter, distinct, limit, are connected and return a Stream.
To summarize, working with streams in general involves three items:
The idea behind a stream pipeline is similar to the builder pattern.[1] In the builder pattern, there’s a chain of calls to set up a configuration (for streams this is a chain of intermediate operations), followed by a call to a build method (for streams this is a terminal operation)
Note that this is an incomplete list of operations provided by the Streams API; you’ll see several more in the next chapter!
In the next chapter, we detail the available stream operations with use cases so you can see what kinds of queries you can express with them.
We look at many patterns such as filtering, slicing, finding, matching, mapping, and reducing, which can be used to express sophisticated data processing queries.
Because chapter 6 deals with collectors in great detail, the only use this chapter and the next one creates a List whose elements are the same as those of the stream it’s applied to.
Here are some key concepts to take away from this chapter:
A stream is a sequence of elements from a source that supports data processing operations.
Streams make use of internal iteration: the iteration is abstracted away through operations such as.
There are two types of stream operations: intermediate and terminal operations.
Intermediate operations such as filter andmap return a stream and can be chained together.
Terminal operations such as forEach and count return a nonstream value and process a stream.
In the previous chapter, you saw that streams let you move from external iteration to internal iteration.
Instead of writing code as follows where you explicitly manage the iteration over a collection of data (external iteration),
All you need to do is pass the filtering behavior as argument to the filter method:
This different way of working with data is useful because you let the Streams API manage how to process the data.
As a consequence, the Streams API can work out several optimizations behind the scenes.
In addition, using internal iteration, the Streams API can decide to run your code in parallel.
Using external iteration, this isn’t possible because you’re committed to a single-threaded step-by-step sequential iteration.
In this chapter, you’ll have an extensive look at the various operations supported by the Streams API.
These operations will let you express complex data processing queries such as filtering, slicing, mapping, finding, matching, and reducing.
Next, we’ll explore special cases of streams: numeric streams, streams built from multiple sources such as files and arrays, and finally infinite streams.
In this section, we look at how to select elements of a stream: filtering with a predicate, filtering only unique elements, ignoring the first few elements of a stream, or truncating a stream to a given size.
The Streams interface supports a filter method (which you should be familiar with by now)
This operation takes as argument a predicate (a function returning a boolean) and returns a stream including all elements that match the predicate.
For example, you can create a vegetarian menu by filtering all vegetarian dishes as follows and as illustrated in figure 5.1:
Streams also support a method called distinct that returns a stream with unique elements (according to the implementation of the hashCode and equals methods of the objects produced by the stream)
For example, the following code filters all even numbers from a list and makes sure that there are no duplicates.
Streams support the limit(n) method, which returns another stream that’s no longer than a given size.
If the stream is ordered, the first elements are returned up to a maximum of n.
For example, you can create a List by selecting the first three dishes that have more than 300 calories as follows:
You can see that only the first three elements that match the predicate are selected and the result is immediately returned.
Note that limit also works on unordered streams (for example, if the source is a Set)
In this case you shouldn’t assume any order on the result produced by limit.
Streams support the skip(n) method to return a stream that discards the first n elements.
If the stream has fewer elements than n, then an empty stream is returned.
Put what you’ve learned in this section into practice with Quiz 5.1 before we move to mapping operations.
How would you use streams to filter the first two meat dishes?
You can solve this problem by composing the methods filter and limit together and using.
A very common data processing idiom is to select information from certain objects.
For example, in SQL you can select a particular column from a table.
The Streams API provides similar facilities through the map and flatMap methods.
Streams support the method map, which takes a function as argument.
For example, in the following code you pass a method reference Dish::getName to the map method to extract the names of the dishes in the stream:
Because the method getName returns a String, the stream outputted by the map method is of type Stream<String>
Let’s take a slightly different example to solidify your understanding of map.
Given a list of words, you’d like to return a list of the number of characters for each word.
How would you do it? You’d need to apply a function to each element of the list.
This sounds like a job for the map method! The function to apply should take a word and return its length.
You can solve this problem as follows by passing a method reference String::length to map:
Let’s now return to the example where you extracted the name of each dish.
What if you wanted to find out the length of the name of each dish? You could do this by chaining another map as follows:
You saw how to return the length for each word in a list using the method map.
You might think that this is easy, that you can just map each word into a list of characters and then call distinct to filter duplicate characters.
The problem with this approach is that the lambda passed to the map method returns a String[] (an array of String) for each word.
So the stream returned by the map method is actually of type Stream<String[]>
What you really want is Stream<String> to represent a stream of characters.
Incorrect use of map to find unique characters from a list of words.
Luckily there’s a solution to this problem using the method flatMap! Let’s see step by step how to solve it.
First, you need a stream of characters instead of a stream of arrays.
Use it in the previous pipeline to see what happens:
You can fix this problem by using flatMap as follows:
Using the flatMap method has the effect of mapping each array not with a stream but with the contents of that stream.
All the separate streams that were generated when using map(Arrays::stream) get amalgamated—flattened into a single stream.
Figure 5.6 illustrates the effect of using the flatMap method.
Using flatMap to find the unique characters from a list of words.
In a nutshell, the flatMap method lets you replace each value of a stream with another stream and then concatenates all the generated streams into a single stream.
To solidify your understanding of map and flatMap, try out Quiz 5.2
You can solve this problem by using map with a lambda that takes a number and returns the square of the number:
For simplicity, you can represent a pair as an array with two elements.
You could use two maps to iterate on the two lists and generate the pairs.
What you need to do is flatten the generated streams to result in a Stream<Integer[]>
You saw earlier that filter can be used with a predicate to filter elements from a stream.
Another common data processing idiom is finding whether some elements in a set of data match a given property.
The Streams API provides such facilities through the allMatch, anyMatch, noneMatch, findFirst, and findAny methods of a stream.
The anyMatch method returns a boolean and is therefore a terminal operation.
The allMatch method works similarly to anyMatch but will check to see if all the elements of the stream match the given predicate.
For example, you can use it to find out whether the menu is healthy (that is, all dishes are below 1000 calories):
It ensures that no elements in the stream match the given predicate.
For example, you could rewrite the previous example as follows using noneMatch:
Some operations don’t need to process the whole stream to produce a result.
For example, say you need to evaluate a large boolean expression chained with and operators.
You need only find out that one expression is false to deduce that the whole expression will return false, no matter how long the expression is; there’s no need to evaluate the entire expression.
In relation to streams, certain operations such as allMatch, noneMatch, findFirst, and findAny don’t need to process the whole stream to produce a result.
As soon as an element is found, a result can be produced.
Similarly, limit is also a short-circuiting operation: the operation only needs to create a stream of a given size without processing all the elements in the stream.
Such operations are useful, for example, when you need to deal with streams of infinite size, because they can turn an infinite stream into a stream of finite size.
The findAny method returns an arbitrary element of the current stream.
It can be used in conjunction with other stream operations.
For example, you may wish to find a dish that’s vegetarian.
You can combine the filter method and findAny to express this query:
The stream pipeline will be optimized behind the scenes to perform a single pass and finish as soon as a result is found by using short-circuiting.
But wait a minute; what’s this Optional thing in the code?
The Optional<T> class (java.util.Optional) is a container class to represent the existence or absence of a value.
In the previous code, it’s possible that findAny doesn’t find any element.
We won’t go into the details of Optional here, because we show in detail in chapter 10 how your code can benefit from using Optional to avoid bugs related to null checking.
But for now, it’s good to know that there are a few methods available in Optional that force you to explicitly check for the presence of a value or deal with the absence of a value:
Consumer functional interface in chapter 3; it lets you pass a lambda that takes an argument of type T and returns void.
For example, in the previous code you’d need to explicitly check for the presence of a dish in the Optional object to access its name:
Some streams have an encounter order that specifies the order in which items logically appear in the stream (for example, a stream generated from a List or from a sorted sequence of data)
For such streams you may wish to find the first element.
There’s the findFirst method for this, which works similarly to findAny.
For example, the code that follows, given a list of numbers, finds the first square that’s divisible by 3:
You may wonder why we have both findFirst and findAny.
If you don’t care about which element is returned, use findAny because it’s less constraining when using parallel streams.
So far, the terminal operations you’ve seen return a boolean (allMatch and so on), void (forEach), or an Optional object (findAny and so on)
You’ve also been using collect to combine all elements in a stream into a List.
Such queries combine all the elements in the stream repeatedly to produce a single value such as an Integer.
These queries can be classified as reduction operations (a stream is reduced to a value)
In functional programming-language jargon, this is referred to as a fold because you can view this operation as repeatedly folding a long piece of paper (your stream) until it forms a small square, which is the result of the fold operation.
Before we investigate how to use the reduce method, it helps to first see how you’d sum the elements of a list of numbers using a for-each loop:
Each element of numbers is combined iteratively with the addition operator to form a result.
You reduce the list of numbers into one number by repeatedly using addition.
Wouldn’t it be great if you could also multiply all the numbers without having to repeatedly copy and paste this code? This is where the reduce operation, which abstracts over this pattern of repeated application, can help.
You can sum all the elements of a stream as follows:
A BinaryOperator<T> to combine two elements and produce a new value; here you use the lambda.
Figure 5.7 illustrates how the reduce operation works on a stream: the lambda combines each element repeatedly until the stream is reduced to a single value.
Let’s take an in-depth look into how the reduce operation happens to sum a stream of numbers.
You can make this code more concise by using a method reference.
In Java 8 the Integer class now comes with a static sum method to add two numbers, which is just what you want instead of repeatedly writing out the same code as lambda:
There’s also an overloaded variant of reduce that doesn’t take an initial value, but it returns an Optional object:
Why does it return an Optional<Integer>? Consider the case when the stream contains no elements.
The reduce operation can’t return a sum because it doesn’t have an initial value.
This is why the result is wrapped in an Optional object to indicate that the sum may be absent.
It turns out that reduction is all you need to compute maxima and minima as well! Let’s see how you can apply what you just learned about reduce to calculate the maximum or minimum element in a stream.
An initial value  A lambda to combine two stream elements and produce a new value.
The lambda is applied step by step to each element of the stream with the addition operator, as shown in figure 5.7
So you need a lambda that, given two elements, returns the maximum of them.
To calculate the minimum, you need to pass Integer.min to the reduce operation instead of Integer.max:
You could have equally well used the lambda (x,y)->x<y?x:y instead of Integer::min, but the latter is easier to read.
To test your understanding of the reduce operation, have a go at Quiz 5.3
How would you count the number of dishes in a stream using the map and reduce methods?
A chain of map and reduce is commonly known as the map-reduce pattern, made famous by Google’s use of it for web searching because it can be easily parallelized.
Note that in chapter 4 you saw the built-in method count to count the number of elements in the stream:
The benefit of using reduce compared to the step-by-step iteration summation that you wrote earlier is that the iteration is abstracted using internal iteration, which enables the internal implementation to choose to perform the reduce operation in parallel.
The iterative summation example involves shared updates to a sum variable, which doesn’t parallelize gracefully.
If you add in the needed synchronization, you’ll likely discover that thread contention robs you of all the performance that parallelism was supposed to give you! Parallelizing this computation requires a different approach: partition the input, sum the partitions, and combine the sums.
But now the code is starting to look really different.
You’ll see what this looks like in chapter 7 using the fork/join framework.
But for now it’s important to realize that the mutable accumulator pattern is a dead end for parallelization.
You need a new pattern, and this is what reduce provides you.
You’ll also see in chapter 7 that to sum all the elements in parallel using.
But there’s a price to pay to execute this code in parallel, as we explain later: the lambda passed to reduce can’t change state (for example, instance variables), and the operation needs to be associative so it can be executed in any order.
So far you saw reduction examples that produced an Integer: the sum of a stream, the maximum of a stream, or the number of elements in a stream.
You’ll see in section 5.6 that built-in methods such as sum and max are available as well to help you write slightly more concise code for common reduction patterns.
We investigate a more complex form of reductions using the collect method in the next chapter.
For example, instead of reducing a stream into an Integer, you can also reduce it into a Map if you want to group dishes by types.
An initial presentation can make them seem a panacea; everything just works, and you get parallelism for free when you use parallelStream instead of stream to get a stream from a collection.
Certainly for many applications this is the case, as you’ve seen in the previous examples.
You can turn a list of dishes into a stream, filter to select various dishes of a certain type, then map down the resulting stream to add on the number of calories, and then reduce to produce the total number of calories of the menu.
There are issues about what internal state they need to operate.
Operations like map and filter take each element from the input stream and produce zero or one result in the output stream.
These operations are thus in general stateless: they don’t have an internal state (assuming the user-supplied lambda or method reference has no internal mutable state)
But operations like reduce, sum, and max need to have internal state to accumulate the result.
In our example it consisted of an int or double.
The internal state is of bounded size no matter how many elements are in the stream being processed.
By contrast, some operations such as sorted or distinct seem at first to behave like filter or map—all take a stream and produce another stream (an intermediate operation), but there’s a crucial difference.
Both sorting and removing duplicates from a stream require knowing the previous history to do their job.
For example, sorting requires all the elements to be buffered before a single item can be added to the output stream; the storage requirement of the operation is unbounded.
This can be problematic if the data stream is large or infinite.
What should reversing the stream of all prime numbers do? It should return the largest prime number, which mathematics tells us doesn’t exist.) We call these operations stateful operations.
You get to practice them in the next section through an exercise.
In this section, you get to practice what you’ve learned about streams so far.
You’re asked by your manager to find answers to eight queries.
Find all transactions in the year 2011 and sort them by value (small to high)
What are all the unique cities where the traders work?
Find all traders from Cambridge and sort them by name.
Print all transactions’ values from the traders living in Cambridge.
Here’s the domain you’ll be working with, a list of Traders and Transactions:
We now provide the solutions in the following code listings, so you can verify your understanding of what you’ve learned so far.
Find all transactions in 2011 and sort by value (small to high)
What are all the unique cities where the traders work?
Find all traders from Cambridge and sort them by name.
Note that this solution isn’t very efficient (all Strings are repeatedly concatenated, which creates a new String object at each iteration)
In the next chapter, you’ll see a more efficient solution.
Print all transactions’ values from the traders living in Cambridge.
A stream supports the methods min and max that take a Comparator as argument to specify which key to compare with when calculating the minimum or maximum:
You saw earlier that you could use the reduce method to calculate the sum of the elements of a stream.
For example, you can calculate the number of calories in the menu as follows:
The problem with this code is that there’s an insidious boxing cost.
Behind the scenes each Integer needs to be unboxed to a primitive before performing the summation.
In addition, wouldn’t it be nicer if you could call a sum method directly as follows?
The problem is that the method map generates a Stream<T>
Even though the elements of the stream are of type Integer, the Streams interface doesn’t define a sum method.
But don’t worry; the Streams API also supplies primitive stream specializations that support specialized methods to work with streams of numbers.
Each of these interfaces brings new methods to perform common numeric reductions such as sum to calculate the sum of a numeric stream and max to find the maximum element.
In addition, they have methods to convert back to a stream of objects when necessary.
The thing to remember is that these specializations aren’t more complexity about streams but instead more complexity caused by boxing—the (efficiency-based) difference between int and Integer and so on.
The most common methods you’ll use to convert a stream to a specialized version are mapToInt, mapToDouble, and mapToLong.
These methods work exactly like the method map that you saw earlier but return a specialized stream instead of a Stream<T>
For example, you can use mapToInt as follows to calculate the sum of calories in the menu:
Here, the method mapToInt extracts all the calories from each dish (represented as an Integer) and returns an IntStream as the result (rather than a Stream<Integer>)
IntStream also supports other convenience methods such as max, min, and average.
Similarly, once you have a numeric stream, you may be interested in converting it back to a nonspecialized stream.
For example, the operations of an IntStream are restricted to produce primitive integers: the map operation of an IntStream takes a lambda that takes an int and produces an int (an IntUnaryOperator)
But you may want to produce a different value such as a Dish.
For this you need to access the operations defined in the Streams interface that are more general.
To convert from a primitive stream to a general stream (each int will be boxed to an Integer) you can use the method boxed as follows:
You’ll learn in the next section that boxed is particularly useful when you deal with numeric ranges that need to be boxed into a general stream.
The sum example was convenient because it has a default value: 0
But if you want to calculate the maximum element in an IntStream, you need something different because 0 is a wrong result.
How can you differentiate that the stream has no element and that the real maximum is 0? Earlier we introduced the Optional class, which is a container that indicates the presence or absence of a value.
Optional can be parameterized with reference types such as Integer, String, and so on.
There’s a primitive specialized version of Optional as well for the three primitive stream specializations: OptionalInt, OptionalDouble, and OptionalLong.
For example, you can find the maximal element of an IntStream by calling the max method, which returns an OptionalInt:
You can now process the OptionalInt explicitly to define a default value if there’s no maximum:
A common use case when dealing with numbers is working with ranges of numeric values.
Java 8 introduces two static methods available on IntStream and LongStream to help generate such ranges: range and rangeClosed.
Both methods take the starting value of the range as the first parameter and the end value of the range as the second parameter.
It produces a stream so you can chain the filter method to select only even numbers.
We now look at a more difficult example so you can solidify what you’ve learned about numeric streams and all the stream operations you’ve learned so far.
Your mission, if you choose to accept it, is to create a stream of Pythagorean triples.
So what’s a Pythagorean triple? We have to go back a few years in the past.
Such triples are useful because they describe the three side lengths of a right-angled triangle, as illustrated in figure 5.9
So where do you start? The first step is to define a triple.
You can now access each individual component of the tuple using array indexing.
Let’s assume someone provides you with the first two numbers of the triple: a and b.
If it’s not an integer, that means c is not an integer.
You can express this requirement as a filter operation (you’ll see how to connect it later to form valid code):
Assuming that surrounding code has given a value for a and assuming stream provides possible values for b, filter will select only those values for b that can form a Pythagorean triple with a.
Following the filter, you know that both a and b can form a correct combination.
You can use the map operation to transform each element into a Pythagorean triple as follows:
You’re getting closer! You now need to generate values for b.
You saw that Stream .rangeClosed allows you to generate a stream of numbers in a given interval.
Note that you call boxed after the filter to generate a Stream<Integer> from the IntStream returned by rangeClosed.
This is because your map returns an array of int for each element of the stream.
The map method from an IntStream expects only another int to be returned for each element of the stream, which isn’t what you want! You can rewrite this using the method mapToObj of an IntStream, which returns an object-valued stream:
There’s one crucial piece that we assumed was given: the value for a.
You now have a stream that produces Pythagorean triples provided the value a is known.
For each given value of a you’re creating a stream of triples.
Mapping a value of a to a stream of triples would result in a stream of streams! The flatMap method does the mapping and also flattens all the generated streams of triples into a single stream.
Note also that you change the range of b to be a to 100
You can now run your solution and select explicitly how many triples you’d like to return from the generated stream using the limit operation that you saw earlier:
The current solution isn’t optimal because you calculate the square root twice.
Hopefully by now you’re convinced that streams are very powerful and useful to express data processing queries.
So far, you were able to get a stream from a collection using the stream method.
In addition, we showed you how to create numerical streams from a range of numbers.
You can create a stream with explicit values by using the static method Stream.of, which can take any number of parameters.
For example, in the following code you create a stream of strings directly using Stream.of.
You then convert the strings to uppercase before printing them one by one:
You can get an empty stream using the empty method as follows:
You can create a stream from an array using the static method Arrays.stream, which takes an array as parameter.
For example, you can convert an array of primitive ints into an IntStream as follows:
Java’s NIO API (non-blocking I/O), which is used for I/O operations such as processing a file, has been updated to take advantage of the Streams API.
For example, a useful method is Files.lines, which returns a stream of lines as strings from a given file.
Using what you’ve learned so far, you could use this method to find out the number of unique words in a file as follows:
You use Files.lines to return a stream where each element is a line in the given file.
You then split each line into words by calling the split method on line.
Notice how you use flatMap to produce one flattened stream of words instead of multiple streams of words for each line.
Finally, you count each distinct word in the stream by chaining the methods distinct and count.
The Streams API provides two static methods to generate a stream from a function: Stream.iterate and Stream.generate.
These two operations let you create what we call an infinite stream: a stream that doesn’t have a fixed size like when you create a stream from a fixed collection.
Streams produced by iterate and generate create values on demand given a function and can therefore calculate values forever! It’s generally sensible to use limit(n) on such streams to avoid printing an infinite number of values.
Let’s look at a simple example of how to use iterate before we explain it:
As a result, the iterate method produces a stream of all even numbers: the first element of the stream is the initial value 0
This iterate operation is fundamentally sequential because the result depends on the previous application.
Note that this operation produces an infinite stream—the stream doesn’t have an end because values are computed on demand and can be computed forever.
As we discussed earlier, this is a key difference between a stream and a collection.
You’re using the limit method to explicitly limit the size of the stream.
You then call the forEach terminal operation to consume the stream and print each element individually.
To see a more difficult example of how you can apply iterate, try out Quiz 5.4
The Fibonacci series is famous as a classic programming exercise.
You can, again rather sloppily, use an array of two elements to represent a tuple.
This will be the initial value of the iterate method:
In this quiz, you need to figure out the highlighted code with the ???
How does it work? iterate needs a lambda to specify the successor element.
Note that if you just wanted to print the normal Fibonacci series, you could use a map to extract only the first element of each tuple:
Similarly to the method iterate, the method generate lets you produce an infinite stream of values computed on demand.
But generate doesn’t apply successively a function on each new produced value.
It takes a lambda of type Supplier<T> to provide new values.
Let’s look at an example of how to use it:
The static method Math.random is used as a generator for new values.
Again you limit the size of the stream explicitly using the limit method; otherwise the stream would be unbounded!
You may be wondering if there’s anything else useful you can do using the method generate.
The supplier we used (a method reference to Math.random) was stateless: it wasn’t recording any values somewhere that can be used in later computations.
You can create a supplier that stores state that it can modify and use when generating the next value of the stream.
We’ll use an IntStream in our example to illustrate code that’s designed to avoid boxing operations.
The generate method on IntStream takes an IntSupplier instead of a Supplier<T>
For example, here’s how to generate an infinite stream of ones:
You saw in the chapter 3 that lambdas let you create an instance of a functional interface by providing the implementation of the method directly inline.
You can also pass an explicit object as follows by implementing the getAsInt method defined in the IntSupplier interface (although this seems gratuitously long-winded, please bear with us):
The generate method will use the given supplier and repeatedly call the getAsInt method, which always returns 2
But the difference between the anonymous class used here and a lambda is that the anonymous class can define state via fields, which the getAsInt method can modify.
All lambdas you’ve seen so far were side-effect free; they didn’t change any state.
To come back to our Fibonacci tasks, what you need to do now is create an IntSupplier that maintains in its state the previous value in the series, so getAsInt can use it to calculate the next element.
In addition, it can update the state of the IntSupplier for the next time it’s called.
The following code shows how to create an IntSupplier that will return the next Fibonacci element when it’s called:
In the preceding code you create an instance of IntSupplier.
This object has mutable state: it tracks the previous Fibonacci element and the current Fibonacci element in two instance variables.
The getAsInt method changes the state of the object when it’s called so that it produces new values on each call.
In comparison, our approach using iterate was purely immutable: you didn’t modify existing state but were creating new tuples at each iteration.
You’ll learn in chapter 7 that you should always prefer an immutable approach in order to process a stream in parallel and expect a correct result.
Note that because you’re dealing with a stream of infinite size, you have to limit its size explicitly using the operation limit; otherwise, the terminal operation (in this case forEach) will compute forever.
Similarly, you can’t sort or reduce an infinite stream because all elements need to be processed, but this would take forever because the stream is infinite!
It’s been a long but rewarding chapter! You can now process collections more effectively.
Indeed, streams let you express sophisticated data processing queries concisely.
Here are some key concepts to take away from this chapter:
The Streams API lets you express complex data processing queries.
You can filter and slice a stream using the filter, distinct, skip, and limitmethods.
You can extract or transform elements of a stream using themap and flatMapmethods.
You can find elements in a stream using the findFirst and findAny methods.
These methods make use of short-circuiting: a computation stops as soon as a result is found; there’s.
You can combine all elements of a stream iteratively to produce a result using the reduce method, for.
Some operations such as filter and map are stateless; they don’t store any state.
Some operations such as sorted and distinct also store state because they need to buffer all the elements of a stream before returning a new stream.
There are three primitive specializations of streams: IntStream, DoubleStream, and LongStream.
Streams can be created not only from a collection but also from values, arrays, files, and specific methods such as iterate and generate.
An infinite stream is a stream that has no fixed size.
You learned in the previous chapter that streams help you process collections with database-like operations.
You can view Java 8 streams as fancy lazy iterators of sets of data.
They support two types of operations: intermediate operations such as filter or map and terminal operations such as count, findFirst, forEach, and reduce.
Intermediate operations can be chained to convert a stream into another stream.
These operations don’t consume from a stream; their purpose is to set up a pipeline of streams.
By contrast, terminal operations do consume from a stream—to produce a final result (for example, returning the largest element in a stream)
They can often shorten computations by optimizing the pipeline of a stream.
In this chapter, you’ll discover that collect is a reduction operation, just like reduce, that takes as argument various recipes for accumulating the elements of a stream into a summary result.
These recipes are defined by a new Collector interface, so it’s important to distinguish Collection, Collector, and collect!
Here are some example queries of what you’ll be able to do using collect and collectors:
Excited? Great, let’s start by exploring an example that benefits from collectors.
Imagine a scenario where you have a List of Transactions, and you want to group them based on their.
In pre-lambda Java, even a simple use case like this is cumbersome to implement, as shown in the following listing.
If you’re an experienced Java developer, you’ll probably feel comfortable writing something like this, but you have to admit that it’s a lot of code for such a simple task.
The difference between the imperative and functional versions of this example is even more pronounced if you perform multilevel groupings: in this case the imperative code quickly becomes harder to read, maintain, and modify due to the number of deeply nested loops and conditions required.
In comparison, the functional-style version, as you’ll discover in section 6.3, can be easily enhanced with an additional collector.
This last observation brings up another typical benefit of a well-designed functional API: its higher degree of composability and reusability.
Collectors are extremely useful because they provide a concise yet flexible way to define the criteria that collect uses to produce the resulting collection.
More specifically, invoking the collect method on a stream triggers a reduction operation (parameterized by a Collector) on the elements of the stream itself.
It traverses each element of the stream and lets the Collector process them.
Typically, the Collector applies a transforming function to the element (quite often this is the identity transformation, which has no effect, for example, as in toList), and accumulates the.
For instance, in our transaction-grouping example shown previously, the transformation function extracts the currency from each transaction, and subsequently the transaction itself is accumulated in the resulting Map, using the currency as key.
The implementation of the methods of the Collector interface defines how to perform a reduction operation on a stream, such as the one in our currency example.
But the Collectors utility class provides lots of static factory methods to conveniently create an instance of the most common collectors that are ready to use.
The most straightforward and frequently used collector is the toList static method, which gathers all the elements of a stream into a List:
In the rest of this chapter, we mainly explore the features of the predefined collectors, those that can be created from the factory methods (such as groupingBy) provided by the Collectors class.
We start with collectors that allow you to reduce and summarize.
These are handy in a variety of use cases such as finding the total amount of the transacted values in the list of transactions in the previous example.
You’ll then see how to group the elements of a stream, generalizing the previous example to multiple levels of grouping or combining different collectors to apply further reduction operations on each of the resulting subgroups.
We’ll also describe partitioning as a special case of grouping, using a predicate, a one-argument function returning a boolean, as a grouping function.
At the end of section 6.4 you’ll find a table summarizing all the predefined collectors explored in this chapter.
To illustrate the range of possible collector instances that can be created from the Collectors factory class, we’ll reuse the domain we introduced in the previous chapter: a menu consisting of a list of delicious dishes!
As you just learned, collectors (the parameters to the Stream method collect) are typically used in cases where it’s necessary to reorganize the stream’s items into a collection.
But more generally, they can be used every time you want to combine all the items in the stream into a single result.
This result can be of any type, as complex as a multilevel map representing a tree or as simple as a single integer—perhaps representing the sum of all the calories in the menu.
As a first simple example, let’s count the number of dishes in the menu, using the collector returned by the counting factory method:
In the rest of this chapter, we assume that you’ve imported all the static factory methods of the Collectors class with.
Let’s continue exploring simple predefined collectors by looking at how you can find the maximum and minimum values in a stream.
Suppose you want to find the highest-calorie dish in the menu.
You can use two collectors, Collectors.maxBy and Collectors.minBy, to calculate the maximum or minimum value in a stream.
These two collectors take a Comparator as argument to compare the elements in the.
Here you create a Comparator comparing dishes based on their calorie content and pass it to Collectors.maxBy:
Here it perfectly represents the idea that there may or may not be a dish returned.
We briefly mentioned it in chapter 5 when you encountered the method findAny.
Another common reduction operation that returns a single value is to sum the values of a numeric field of the objects in a stream.
The Collectors class provides a specific factory method for summing: Collectors .summingInt.
It accepts a function that maps an object into the int that has to be summed and returns a collector that, when passed to the usual collect method, performs the requested summarization.
So, for instance, you can find the total number of calories in your menu list with.
Here the collection process proceeds as illustrated in figure 6.2
While traversing the stream each dish is mapped into its number of calories, and this number is added to an accumulator starting from an initial value (in this case the value is 0)
The Collectors.summingLong and Collectors.summingDouble methods behave exactly the same way and can be used where the field to be summed is respectively a long or a double.
But there’s more to summarization than mere summing; also available is a Collectors .averagingInt, together with its averagingLong and averagingDouble counterparts, to calculate the average of the same set of numeric values:
So far, you’ve seen how to use collectors to count the elements in a stream, find the maximum and minimum values of a numeric property of those elements, and calculate their sum and average.
Quite often, though, you may want to retrieve two or more of these results, and possibly you’d like to do it in a single operation.
In this case, you can use the collector returned by the summarizingInt factory method.
For example, you can count the elements in the menu and.
This collector gathers all that information in a class called IntSummaryStatistics that provides convenient getter methods to access the results.
As usual, there are corresponding summarizingLong and summarizingDouble factory methods with associated types LongSummaryStatistics and DoubleSummaryStatistics; these are used when the property to be collected is a primitive-type long or a double.
The collector returned by the joining factory method concatenates into a single string all strings resulting from invoking the toString method on each object in the stream.
This means you can concatenate the names of all the dishes in the menu as follows:
Note that joining internally makes use of a StringBuilder to append the generated strings into one.
Also note that if the Dish class had a toString method returning the dish’s name, you’d obtain the same result without needing to map over the original stream with a function extracting the name from each dish:
Fortunately, the joining factory method has an overloaded version that accepts a delimiter string between two consecutive elements, so you can obtain a comma-separated list of the dishes’ names with.
Until now, we’ve explored various collectors that reduce a stream to a single value.
In the next section, we demonstrate how all the reduction processes of this form are special cases of the more general reduction collector provided by the Collectors.reducing factory method.
All the collectors we’ve discussed so far are, in reality, only convenient specializations of a reduction process that can be defined using the reducing factory method.
The Collectors.reducing factory method is a generalization of all of them.
The special cases discussed earlier are arguably provided only for programmer convenience.
But remember that programmer convenience and readability are of prime importance!) For instance, it’s possible to calculate the total calories in your menu with a collector created from the reducing method as follows:
The first argument is the starting value of the reduction operation and will also be the value returned in the case of a stream with no elements, so clearly 0 is the appropriate value in the case of a numeric sum.
The second argument is the same function you used in section 6.2.2 to transform a dish into an int representing its calorie content.
The third argument is a BinaryOperator that aggregates two items into a single value of the same type.
Similarly, you could find the highest-calorie dish using the one-argument version of reducing as follows:
You can think of the collector created with the one-argument reducing factory method as a particular case of the three-argument method, which uses the first item in the stream as a.
We’ve discussed reductions a lot in the previous chapter and this one.
You may naturally wonder what the differences between the collect and reduce methods of the Stream interface are, because often you can obtain the same results using either method.
For instance, you can achieve what is done by the toList Collector using the reduce method as follows:
This solution has two problems: a semantic one and a practical one.
The semantic problem lies in the fact that the reduce method is meant to combine two values and produce a new one; it’s an immutable reduction.
In contrast, the collect method is designed to mutate a container to accumulate the result it’s supposed to produce.
This means that the previous snippet of code is misusing the reduce method because it’s mutating in place the List used as accumulator.
As you’ll see in more detail in the next chapter, using the reduce method with the wrong semantic is also the cause of a practical problem: this reduction process can’t work in parallel because the concurrent modification of the same data structure operated by multiple threads can corrupt the List itself.
In this case, if you want thread safety, you’ll need to allocate a new List every time, which would impair performance by object allocation.
This is the main reason why the collect method is useful for expressing reduction working on a mutable container but crucially in a parallel-friendly way, as you’ll learn later in the chapter.
Collection framework flexibility: doing the same operation in different ways.
You can further simplify the previous sum example using the reducing collector by using a reference to the sum method of the Integer class instead of the lambda expression you used to encode the same operation.
Logically, this reduction operation proceeds as shown in figure 6.3, where an accumulator, initialized with a starting value, is iteratively combined, using an aggregating function, with the result of the application of the transforming function on each element of the stream.
The reduction process calculating the total number of calories in the menu.
The counting collector we mentioned at the beginning of section 6.2 is, in reality, similarly implemented using the three-argument reducing factory method.
It transforms each element in the stream to an object of type Long with value 1 and then sums all these ones:
In the code snippet just shown, you probably noticed the ? wildcard, used as the second generic type in the signature of the collector returned by the counting factory method.
You should already be familiar with this notation, especially if you use the Java Collection Framework quite frequently.
But here it means only that the type of the collector’s accumulator is unknown, or in other words, the accumulator itself can be of any type.
We used it here to exactly report the signature of the method as originally defined in the Collectors class, but in the rest of the chapter we avoid any wildcard notation to keep the discussion as simple as possible.
Note that, like any one-argument reduce operation on a stream, the invocation reduce(Integer::sum) doesn’t return an int but an Optional<Integer> to manage in a null-safe way the case of a reduction operation over an empty stream.
Here you just extract the value inside the Optional object using its get method.
Note that in this case using the get method is safe only because you’re sure that the stream of dishes isn’t empty.
In general, as you’ll learn in chapter 10, it’s safer to unwrap the value eventually contained in an Optional using a method that also allows you to provide a default, such as orElse or orElseGet.
Finally, and even more concisely, you can achieve the same result by mapping the stream to an IntStream and then invoking the sum method on it:
Once again, this demonstrates how functional programming in general (and the new API based on functional-style principles added to the Collections framework in Java 8 in particular) often provides multiple ways to perform the same operation.
Our suggestion is to explore the largest number of solutions possible for the problem at hand, but always choose the most specialized one that’s general enough to solve it.
This is often the best decision for both readability and performance reasons.
For instance, to calculate the total calories in our menu, we’d prefer the last solution (using IntStream) because it’s the most concise and likely also the most readable one.
At the same time, it’s also the one that performs best, because IntStream lets us avoid all the auto-unboxing operations, or implicit conversions from Integer to int, that are useless in this case.
Next, take the time to test your understanding of how reducing can be used as a generalization of other collectors by working through the exercise in Quiz 6.1
Which of the following statements using the reducing collector are valid replacements for this joining collector (as used in section 6.2.3)?
This converts each dish in its name, as done by the original statement using the joining collector, and then reduces the resulting stream of strings using a String as accumulator and appending to it the names of the dishes one by one.
This means that it wants a function taking two arguments and returns a value of the same type, but the lambda expression used there has two dishes as arguments but returns a string.
This starts the reduction process with an empty string as the accumulator, and when traversing the stream of dishes it converts each dish to its name and appends this name to the accumulator.
Note that, as we mentioned, reducing doesn’t need the three arguments to return an Optional because in the case of an empty stream it can return a more meaningful value, which is the empty string used as the initial accumulator value.
Nevertheless, for all practical purposes we always suggest using the joining collector for both readability and performance reasons.
A common database operation is to group items in a set, based on one or more properties.
As you saw in the earlier transactions-currency-grouping example, this operation can be cumbersome, verbose, and error prone when implemented with an imperative style.
But it can be easily translated in a single, very readable statement by rewriting it in a more functional style as encouraged by Java 8
As a second example of how this feature works, suppose you want to classify the dishes in the menu according to their type, putting the ones containing meat in a group, the ones with fish in another group, and all others in a third group.
You can easily perform this task using a collector returned by the Collectors.groupingBy factory method as follows:
Here, you pass to the groupingBy method a Function (expressed in the form of a method reference) extracting the corresponding Dish.Type for each Dish in the stream.
We call this Function a classification function because it’s used to classify the elements of the stream into different groups.
The result of this grouping operation, shown in figure 6.4, is a Map having as map key the value returned by the classification function and as corresponding map value a list of all the items in the stream having that classified value.
In the menu-classification example a key is the type of dish, and its value is a list containing all the dishes of that type.
Classification of an item in the stream during the grouping process.
But it isn’t always possible to use a method reference as a classification function, because you may wish to classify using something more complex than a simple property accessor.
Because the author of the Dish class unhelpfully didn’t provide such an operation as a method, you can’t use a method reference in this case, but you can express this logic in a lambda expression:
Now you’ve seen how to group the dishes in the menu, both by their type and by calories, but what if you want to use both criteria at the same time? Grouping is powerful because it composes effectively.
You can achieve multilevel grouping by using a collector created with a two-argument version of the Collectors.groupingBy factory method, which accepts a second argument of type collector besides the usual classification function.
So to perform a two-level grouping, you can pass an inner groupingBy to the outer groupingBy, defining a second-level criterion to classify the stream’s items, as shown in the next listing.
The result of this two-level grouping is a two-level Map like the following:
Figure 6.5 shows how this structure is also equivalent to an n-dimensional table, highlighting the classification purpose of the grouping operation.
In general, it helps to think that groupingBy works in terms of “buckets.” The first groupingBy creates a bucket for each key.
You then collect the elements in each bucket with the downstream collector and so on to achieve n-level groupings!
In the previous section, you saw that it’s possible to pass a second groupingBy collector to the outer one to achieve a multilevel grouping.
But more generally, the second collector passed to the first groupingBy can be any type of collector, not just another groupingBy.
For instance, it’s possible to count the number of Dishes in the menu for each type, by passing the counting collector as a second argument to the groupingBy collector:
Also note that the regular one-argument groupingBy(f), where f is the classification function, is.
To give another example, you could rework the collector you already used to find the highest-calorie dish in the menu to achieve a similar result, but now classified by the type of dish:
The result of this grouping is then clearly a Map, having as keys the available types of Dishes and as values the Optional<Dish>, wrapping the corresponding highest-calorie Dish for a given type:
The values in this Map are Optionals because this is the resulting type of the collector generated by the maxBy factory method, but in reality if there’s no Dish in the menu for a given type, that groupingBy collector lazily adds a new key in the grouping Map only the first time it finds an element in the stream, producing that key when applying on it the grouping criteria being used.
This means that in this case, the Optional wrapper isn’t very useful, because it’s not modeling a value that could be eventually absent but is there incidentally, only because this is the type returned by the reducing collector.
Because the Optionals wrapping all the values in the Map resulting from the last grouping operation aren’t very useful in this case, you may want to get rid of them.
To achieve this, or more generally, to adapt the result returned by a collector to a different type, you could use the collector returned by the Collectors.collectingAndThen factory method, as shown in the following listing.
This factory method takes two arguments, the collector to be adapted and a transformation function, and returns another collector.
This additional collector acts as a wrapper for the old one and maps the value it returns using the transformation function as the last step of the collect operation.
In this case, the wrapped collector is the one created with maxBy, and the transformation function, Optional::get, extracts the value contained in the Optional returned.
It’s quite common to use multiple nested collectors, and at first the way they interact may not always be obvious.
From the outermost layer and moving inward, note the following:
Combining the effect of multiple collectors by nesting one inside the other.
The collectors are represented by the dashed lines, so groupingBy is the outermost one and groups the menu stream into three substreams according to the different dishes’ types.
The groupingBy collector wraps the collectingAndThen collector, so each substream resulting from the grouping operation is further reduced by this second collector.
The collectingAndThen collector wraps in turn a third collector, themaxBy one.
The reduction operation on the substreams is then performed by the reducing collector, but the collectingAndThen collector containing it applies the Optional::get transformation function to its result.
The three transformed values, being the highest-calorie Dishes for a given type (resulting from the execution of this process on each of the three substreams), will be the values associated with the respective classification keys, the types ofDishes, in theMap returned by the groupingBy collector.
More generally, the collector passed as second argument to the groupingBy factory method will be used to perform a further reduction operation on all the elements in the stream classified into the same group.
For example, you could also reuse the collector created to sum the calories of all the dishes in the menu to obtain a similar result, but this time for each group of Dishes:
Yet another collector, commonly used in conjunction with groupingBy, is one generated by the mapping method.
This method takes two arguments: a function transforming the elements in a stream and a further collector accumulating the objects resulting from this transformation.
Its purpose is to adapt a collector accepting elements of a given type to one working on objects of a different type, by applying a mapping function to each input element before accumulating them.
To see a practical example of using this collector, suppose you want to know which CaloricLevels are available in the menu for each type of Dish.
You could achieve this result combining a groupingBy and a mapping collector as follows:
Here the transformation function passed to the mapping method maps a Dish into its CaloricLevel, as you’ve seen before.
The resulting stream of CaloricLevels is then passed to a toSet collector, analogous to the toList one, but accumulating the elements of a stream into a Set instead of into a List, to keep only the distinct values.
If you’re in the mood for fish and you’re on a diet, you could easily find a dish; likewise, if you’re very hungry and want something with lots of calories, you could satisfy your robust appetite by choosing something from the meat section of the menu.
Note that in the previous example, there are no guarantees about what type of Set is returned.
For example, you can ask for a HashSet by passing a constructor reference to it:
Partitioning is a special case of grouping: having a predicate (a function returning a boolean), called a partitioning function, as a classification function.
The fact that the partitioning function returns a boolean means the resulting grouping Map will have a Boolean as a key type and therefore there can be at most two different groups—one for true and one for false.
For instance, if you’re vegetarian or have invited a vegetarian friend to have dinner with you, you may be interested in partitioning the menu into vegetarian and nonvegetarian dishes:
So you could retrieve all the vegetarian dishes by getting from this Map the value indexed with the key true:
Note that you could achieve the same result by just filtering the stream created from the menu List with the same predicate used for partitioning and then collecting the result in an additional List:
Partitioning has the advantage of keeping both lists of the stream elements, for which the application of the partitioning function returns true or false.
So in the previous example, you can obtain the List of the nonvegetarian Dishes by accessing the value of the key false in the partitionedMenu Map, using two separate filtering operations: one with the predicate and one with its negation.
Also, as you already saw for grouping, the partitioningBy factory method has an overloaded version to which you can pass a second collector, as shown here:
Here the grouping of the dishes by their type is applied individually to both of the substreams of vegetarian and nonvegetarian dishes resulting from the partitioning, producing a two-level Map that’s similar to the one you obtained when you performed the two-level grouping in section 6.3.1
As another example, you can reuse your earlier code to find the most caloric dish among both vegetarian and nonvegetarian dishes:
We started this section by saying that you can think of partitioning as a special case of grouping.
The analogies between the groupingBy and partitioningBy collectors don’t end here; as you’ll see in the next quiz, you can also perform multilevel partitioning in a way similar to what you did for grouping in section 6.3.1
As you’ve seen, like the groupingBy collector, the partitioningBy collector can be used in combination with other collectors.
In particular it could be used with a second partitioningBy collector to achieve a multilevel partitioning.
What will be the result of the following multilevel partitionings?
This is a valid multilevel partitioning, producing the following two-level Map:
This won’t compile because partitioningBy requires a predicate, a function returning a boolean.
And the method reference Dish::getType can’t be used as a predicate.
This counts the number of items in each partition, resulting in the following Map:
To give one last example of how you can use the partitioningBy collector, we’ll put aside the menu data model and look at something a bit more complex but also more interesting: partitioning numbers into prime and nonprime.
Suppose you want to write a method accepting as argument an int n and partitioning the first n natural numbers into prime and nonprime.
But first, it will be useful to develop a predicate that tests to see if a given candidate number is prime or not:
A simple optimization is to test only for factors less than or equal to the square root of the candidate:
To partition the first n numbers into prime and nonprime, it’s enough to create a stream containing those n numbers and reduce it with a partitioningBy collector using as predicate the isPrime method you just developed:
We’ve now covered all the collectors that can be created using the static factory methods of the Collectors class, showing practical examples of how they work.
Reduce the stream to a single value starting from an initial value used as accumulator and iteratively combining it with each item of the stream using a BinaryOperator.
Wrap another collector and apply a transformation function to its result.
As we mentioned at the beginning of the chapter, all these collectors implement the Collector interface, so in the remaining part of the chapter we investigate this interface in more detail.
We investigate the methods in that interface and then explore how you can implement your own collectors.
The Collector interface consists of a set of methods that provide a blueprint for how to implement specific reduction operations (that is, collectors)
You’ve seen many collectors that implement the Collector interface, such as toList or groupingBy.
This also implies that you’re free to create customized reduction operations by providing your own implementation of the Collector interface.
In section 6.6 we show how you can implement the Collector interface to create a collector to partition a stream of numbers into prime and nonprime more efficiently than what you’ve seen so far.
To get started with the Collector interface, we focus on one of the first collectors you encountered at the beginning of this chapter: the toList factory method, which gathers all the elements of a stream in a List.
We said that you’ll frequently use this collector in your day-to-day job, but it’s also one that, at least conceptually, is straightforward to develop.
Investigating in more detail how this collector is implemented is a good way to understand how the Collector interface is defined and how the functions returned by its methods are internally used by the collect method.
Let’s start by taking a look at the definition of the Collector interface in the next listing, which shows the interface signature together with the five methods it declares.
A is the type of the accumulator, the object on which the partial result will be accumulated during the.
We can now analyze one by one the five methods declared by the Collector interface.
When we do so, you’ll notice that each of the first four methods returns a function that will be invoked by the collect method, whereas the fifth one, characteristics, provides a set of characteristics that’s a list of hints used by the collect method itself to know which optimizations (for example, parallelization) it’s allowed to employ while performing the reduction operation.
The supplier method has to return a Supplier of an empty result—a parameterless function that when invoked creates an instance of an empty accumulator used during the collection process.
Clearly, for a collector returning the accumulator itself as result, like our ToListCollector, this.
In our ToListCollector the supplier will then return an empty List as follows:
Note that you could also just pass a constructor reference:
Adding an element to a result container: the accumulator method.
The accumulator method returns the function that performs the reduction operation.
When traversing the nth element in the stream, this function is applied with two arguments, the accumulator being the result of the reduction (after having collected the first n–1 items of the stream) and the nth element itself.
The function returns void because the accumulator is modified in place, meaning that its internal state is changed by the function application to reflect the effect of the traversed element.
For ToListCollector, this function merely has to add the current item to the list containing the already traversed ones:
You could instead use a method reference, which is more concise:
Applying the final transformation to the result container: the finisher method.
The finisher method has to return a function that’s invoked at the end of the accumulation process, after having completely traversed the stream, in order to transform the accumulator object into the final result of the whole collection operation.
Often, as in the case of the ToListCollector, the accumulator object already coincides with the final expected result.
These first three methods are enough to execute a sequential reduction of the stream that, at least from a logical point of view, could proceed as in figure 6.7
The implementation details are a bit more difficult in practice due to both the lazy nature of the stream, which could require a pipeline of other intermediate operations to execute before the collect operation, and the possibility, in theory, of performing the reduction in parallel.
The combiner method, the last of the four methods that return a function used by the reduction operation, defines how the accumulators resulting from the reduction of different subparts of.
In the toList case, the implementation of this method is simple; just add the list containing the items gathered from the second subpart of the stream to the end of the list obtained when traversing the first subpart:
The addition of this fourth method allows a parallel reduction of the stream.
This uses the fork/join framework introduced in Java 7 and the Spliterator abstraction that you’ll learn about in the next chapter.
It follows a process similar to the one shown in figure 6.8 and described in detail here:
The original stream is recursively split in substreams until a condition defining whether a stream needs to be further divided becomes false (parallel computing is often slower than sequential computing when the units of work being distributed are too small, and it’s pointless to generate many more parallel tasks than you have processing cores)
At this point all substreams can be processed in parallel, each of them using the sequential reduction algorithm shown in figure 6.7
Finally, all the partial results are combined pairwise using the function returned by the combiner method of the collector.
This is done by combining results corresponding to substreams associated with each split of the original stream.
The last method, characteristics, returns an immutable set of Characteristics, defining the behavior of the collector—in particular providing hints about whether the stream can be reduced in parallel and which optimizations are valid when doing so.
UNORDERED—The result of the reduction isn’t affected by the order in which the items in the stream are traversed and accumulated.
CONCURRENT—The accumulator function can be called concurrently from multiple threads, and then this collector can perform a parallel reduction of the stream.
If the collector isn’t also flagged as UNORDERED, it can perform a parallel reduction only when it’s applied to an unordered data source.
IDENTITY_FINISH—This indicates the function returned by the finisher method is the identity one, and its application can be omitted.
In this case, the accumulator object is directly used as the final result of the reduction process.
This also implies that it’s safe to do an unchecked cast from the accumulator A to the result R.
The ToListCollector developed so far is IDENTITY_FINISH, because the List used to accumulate the elements in the stream is already the expected final result and doesn’t need any further transformation, but it isn’t UNORDERED because if you apply it to an ordered stream you want this ordering to be preserved in the resulting List.
Finally, it’s CONCURRENT, but following what we just said, the stream will be processed in parallel only if its underlying data source is unordered.
The five methods analyzed in the preceding subsection are everything you need to develop your own ToListCollector, so you can implement it by putting all of them together, as the next listing shows.
Note that this implementation isn’t identical to the one returned by the Collectors .toList method, but it differs only in some minor optimizations.
These optimizations are mostly related when it has to return an empty list.
This means that it could be safely used in place of the original Java as an example to gather a list of all the Dishes of a menu stream:
In the case of an IDENTITY_FINISH collection operation, there’s a further possibility of obtaining the same result without developing a completely new implementation of the Collector interface.
So, for instance, it’s possible to collect in a List all the items in a stream of dishes as follows:
We believe that this second form, even if more compact and concise than the former one, is rather less readable.
Also, developing an implementation of your custom collector in a proper class promotes its reuse and helps avoid code duplication.
It’s also worth noting that you’re not allowed to pass any Characteristics to this second collect method, so it always behaves as an IDENTITY_FINISH and CONCURRENT but not UNORDERED collector.
In the next section, you’ll take your new knowledge of implementing collectors to the next level.
You’ll develop your own custom collector for a more complex but hopefully more specific and compelling use case.
In section 6.4, where we discussed partitioning, you created a collector, using one of the many convenient factory methods provided by the Collectors class, which divides the first n natural numbers into primes and nonprimes, as shown in the following listing.
Partitioning the first n natural numbers into primes and nonprimes.
There you achieved an improvement over the original isPrime method by limiting the number of divisors to be tested against the candidate prime to those not bigger than the candidate’s square root:
Is there a way to obtain even better performances? The answer is yes, but for this you’ll have to develop a custom collector.
One possible optimization is to test only if the candidate number is divisible by prime numbers.
It’s pointless to test it against a divisor that’s not itself prime! So you can limit the test to only the prime numbers found before the current candidate.
The problem with the predefined collectors you’ve used so far, and the reason you have to develop a custom one, is that during the collecting process you don’t have access to the partial result.
This means that when testing whether a given candidate number is prime or not, you don’t have access to the list of the other prime numbers found so far.
Suppose you had this list; you could pass it to the isPrime method and rewrite it as follows:
Also, you should implement the same optimization you used before and test only with primes smaller than the square root of the candidate number.
Unfortunately, there isn’t such a method available in the Streams API.
You could use filter would process the whole stream before returning the adequate stream.
If both the list of primes and the candidate number were very large, this would be problematic.
You don’t need to do this; all you want is to stop once you find a prime that’s greater than the candidate root! Therefore, you’ll create a method called takeWhile, which, given a sorted list and a predicate, returns the longest prefix of this list whose elements satisfy the predicate:
Using this method, you can optimize the isPrime method by testing only the candidate prime against only the primes that are not greater than its square root:
Ideally you’d like a lazy version of takeWhile so it can be merged with the noneMatch operation.
Unfortunately, implementing it would be beyond the scope of this chapter because you’d need to get a grip on the Streams API implementation.
With this new isPrime method in hand, you’re now ready to implement your own custom collector.
First, you need to declare a new class that implements the Collector interface.
Then, you need to develop the five methods required by the Collector interface.
Let’s start with the class signature, remembering that the Collector interface is defined as.
Next, you need to implement the five methods declared in the Collector interface.
The supplier method has to return a function that when invoked creates the accumulator:
Here you’re not only creating the Map that you’ll use as the accumulator, but you’re also initializing it with two empty lists under the true and false keys.
This is where you’ll add respectively the prime and nonprime numbers during the collection process.
The most defining how the elements of the stream have to be collected.
In this case, it’s also the key to implementing the optimization we described previously.
At any given iteration you can now access the partial result of the collection process, which is the accumulator containing the prime numbers found so far:
In this method, you invoke the isPrime method, passing to it (together with the number for which you want to test whether it’s prime or not) the list of the prime numbers found so far (these are the values indexed by the true key in the accumulating Map)
The result of this invocation is then used as key to get the list of either the prime or nonprime numbers so you can add the new candidate to the right list.
Step 3: Making the collector work in parallel (if possible)
The next method has to combine two partial accumulators in the case of a parallel collection process, so in this case it just has to merge the two Maps by adding all the numbers in the prime and nonprime lists of the second Map to the corresponding lists in the first Map:
Note that in reality this collector can’t be used in parallel, because the algorithm is inherently sequential.
This means the combiner method won’t ever be invoked, and you could leave its implementation empty (or better, throw an UnsupportedOperation-Exception)
Step 4: The finisher method and the collector’s characteristic method.
The implementation of the last two methods is quite straightforward: as we said, the accumulator coincides with the collector’s result so it won’t need any further transformation, and the finisher method returns the identity function:
As for the characteristic method, we already said that it’s neither CONCURRENT nor UNORDERED but is IDENTITY_FINISH:
You can now use this new custom collector in place of the former one created with the partitioningBy factory method in section 6.4 and obtain exactly the same result:
The collector created with the partitioningBy factory method and the custom one you just developed are functionally identical, but did you achieve your goal of improving the performance of the partitioningBy collector with your custom one? Let’s write a quick harness to check this:
Note that a more scientific benchmarking approach would be to use a framework such as JMH, but we didn’t want to add the complexity of using such a framework here and, for this use case, the results provided by this small benchmarking class are accurate enough.
This class partitions the first million natural numbers into primes and nonprimes, invoking the method using the collector created with the partitioningBy factory method 10 times and registering the fastest execution.
Now replace partitionPrimes with partitionPrimesWithCustomCollector in the harness, in order to test the performances of the custom collector you developed.
Finally, it’s important to note that, as you did for the ToListCollector in listing 6.5, it’s possible to obtain the same result by passing the three functions implementing the core logic of PrimeNumbersCollector to the overloaded version of the collect method, taking them as arguments:
As you can see, in this way you can avoid creating a completely new class that implements the Collector interface; the resulting code is more compact, even if it’s also probably less readable and certainly less reusable.
Following are the key concepts you should take away from this chapter:
Predefined collectors include reducing and summarizing stream elements into a single value, such as calculating the minimum, maximum, or average.
Predefined collectors let you group elements of a stream with groupingBy and partition elements of a stream with partitioningBy.
Collectors compose effectively to create multilevel groupings, partitions, and reductions.
You can develop your own collectors by implementing the methods defined in the Collector interface.
In the last three chapters, you’ve seen how the new Stream interface lets you manipulate collections of data in a declarative way.
We also explained that the shift from external to internal iteration enables the native Java library to gain control over processing the elements of a stream.
This approach relieves Java developers from explicitly implementing optimizations necessary to speed up the processing of collections of data.
By far the most important benefit is the possibility of executing a pipeline of operations on these collections that automatically makes use of the multiple cores on your computer.
For instance, before Java 7, processing a collection of data in parallel was extremely cumbersome.
First, you needed to explicitly split the data structure containing your data into subparts.
Second, you needed to assign each of these subparts to a different thread.
Third, you needed to synchronize them opportunely to avoid unwanted race conditions, wait for the completion of all threads, and finally combine the partial results.
Java 7 introduced a framework called fork/join to perform these operations more consistently and in a less error-prone way.
In this chapter, you’ll discover how the Stream interface gives you the opportunity to execute operations in parallel on a collection of data without much effort.
It lets you declaratively turn a sequential stream into a parallel one.
Moreover, you’ll see how Java can make this magic happen or, more practically, how parallel streams work under the hood by employing the fork/join framework introduced in Java 7
You’ll also discover that it’s important to know how parallel streams work internally, because if you ignore this aspect, you could obtain unexpected (and very likely wrong) results by misusing them.
In particular we’ll demonstrate that the way a parallel stream gets divided into chunks, before processing the different chunks in parallel, can in some cases be the origin of these incorrect and apparently unexplainable results.
For this reason, you’ll learn how to take control of this splitting process by implementing and using your own Spliterator.
In chapter 4, we briefly mentioned that the Stream interface allows you to process its elements in parallel in a very convenient way: it’s possible to turn a collection into a parallel stream by invoking the method parallelStream on the collection source.
A parallel stream is a stream that splits its elements into multiple chunks, processing each chunk with a different thread.
Thus, you can automatically partition the workload of a given operation on all the cores of your multicore processor and keep all of them equally busy.
Let’s experiment with this idea by using a simple example.
Let’s suppose you need to write a method accepting a number n as argument and returning the sum of all the numbers from 1 to the given argument.
A straightforward (perhaps naïve) approach is to generate an infinite stream of numbers, limiting it to the passed number, and then reduce the resulting stream with a BinaryOperator that just sums two numbers, as follows:
In more traditional Java terms, this code is equivalent to its iterative counterpart:
This operation seems to be a good candidate to leverage parallelization, especially for large values of n.
It’s a much simpler problem to solve if you adopt parallel streams!
You can make the former functional reduction process (that is, summing) run in parallel by turning the stream into a parallel one; call the method parallel on the sequential stream:
In the previous code, the reduction process used to sum all the numbers in the stream works in a way that’s similar to what’s described in section 5.4.1
The difference is that the Stream is internally divided into multiple chunks.
As a result, the reduction operation can work on the various chunks independently and in parallel, as shown in figure 7.1
Finally, the same reduction operation combines the values resulting from the partial reductions of each substream, producing the result of the reduction process on the whole initial stream.
Note that, in reality, calling the method parallel on a sequential stream doesn’t imply any concrete transformation on the stream itself.
Internally, a boolean flag is set to signal that you want to run in parallel all the operations that follow the invocation to parallel.
Similarly, you can turn a parallel stream into a sequential one by just invoking the method sequential on it.
Note that you might think that you could achieve finer-grained control over which operations you want to perform in parallel and which one sequentially while traversing the stream by combining these two methods.
But the last call to parallel or sequential wins and affects the pipeline globally.
In this example, the pipeline will be executed in parallel because that’s the last call in the pipeline.
Looking at the stream’s parallel method, you may wonder where the threads used by the parallel stream come from, how many there are, and how you can customize the process.
Parallel streams internally use the default ForkJoinPool (you’ll learn more about the fork/join framework in section 7.2), which by default has as many threads as you have processors, as.
But you can change the size of this pool using the system property java.util.concurrent.ForkJoinPool.common.parallelism, as in the following example:
This is a global setting, so it will affect all the parallel streams in your code.
Conversely, it currently isn’t possible to specify this value for a single parallel stream.
In general, having the size of the ForkJoinPool equal to the number of processors on your machine is a meaningful default, and we strongly suggest that you not modify it unless you have a very good reason for doing so.
Returning to the numbers-summing exercise, we said that you can expect a significant performance improvement in its parallel version when running it on a multicore processor.
You now have three methods executing exactly the same operation in three different ways (iterative style, sequential reduction, and parallel reduction), so let’s see which is the fastest one!
We claimed that the parallelized summing method should perform better than the sequential and the iterative methods.
Nevertheless, in software engineering guessing is never a good idea! Especially when optimizing performance you should always follow three golden rules: measure, measure, measure.
To this purpose you can develop a method very similar to the basic harness you used in section 6.6.2 to compare the performances of the two collectors partitioning numbers into prime and nonprime, as shown in the following listing.
Measuring performance of a function summing the first n numbers.
Here this method takes as arguments a function and a long.
It applies the function 10 times on the long passed to the method, registers the time taken by each execution in milliseconds, and returns the duration of the fastest one.
Supposing that you group all the methods you developed previously into a class named ParallelStreams, you can use this harness to check how long the sequential adder function takes to sum the first 10 million natural numbers:
Note that the results should be taken with a grain of salt.
Many factors will influence the execution time, such as how many cores your machine supports! You can try this on your own machine by running the code available on the book’s repository.
You should expect that the iterative version using a traditional for loop runs much faster because it works at a much lower level and, more important, doesn’t need to perform any boxing or unboxing of the primitive values.
Now let’s do the same with the parallel version of that function.
This is quite disappointing: the parallel version of the summing method is much slower than the sequential one.
How can you explain this unexpected result? There are actually two issues mixed together:
The second issue is particularly interesting because you need to keep a mental model that some stream operations are more parallelizable than others.
Specifically, the iterate operation is hard to split into chunks that can be executed independently because the input of one function application always depends on the result of the previous application, as illustrated in figure 7.2
This means that in this specific case the reduction process isn’t proceeding as depicted in figure 7.1: the whole list of numbers isn’t available at the beginning of the reduction process, making it impossible to efficiently partition the stream in chunks to be processed in parallel.
By flagging the stream as parallel, you’re just adding to the sequential processing the overhead of allocating each sum operation on a different thread.
This demonstrates how parallel programming can be tricky and sometimes counterintuitive.
When misused (for example, using an operation that’s not parallel-friendly, like iterate) it can actually worsen the overall performance of your programs, so it’s mandatory to understand what happens behind the scenes when you invoke that apparently magic parallel method.
LongStream.rangeClosed works on primitive long numbers directly so there’s no boxing and unboxing overhead.
LongStream.rangeClosed produces ranges of numbers, which can be easily split into independent chunks.
Let’s first see how it performs on a sequential stream to see if the overhead associated with unboxing is relevant:
The numeric stream is much faster than the earlier sequential version, generated with the iterate factory method, because the numeric stream avoids all the overhead caused by all the unnecessary autoboxing and unboxing operations performed by the nonspecialized stream.
This is evidence that choosing the right data structures is often more important than parallelizing the algorithm that uses them.
But what happens if you try to use a parallel stream in this new version that follows?
Finally, you obtain a parallel reduction that’s faster than its sequential counterpart, because this time the reduction operation can actually be executed as shown in figure 7.1
This also demonstrates that using the right data structure and then making it work in parallel guarantees the best performance.
Nevertheless, keep in mind that parallelization doesn’t come for free.
The parallelization process itself requires you to recursively partition the stream, assign the reduction operation of each substream to a different thread, and then combine the results of these operations in a single value.
But moving data between multiple cores is also more expensive than you might expect, so it’s important that work to be done in parallel on another core takes longer than the time.
In general, there are many cases where it isn’t possible or convenient to use parallelization.
But before you use a parallel Stream to make your code faster, you have to be sure that you’re using it correctly; it’s not helpful to produce a result in less time if the result will be wrong.
The main cause of errors generated by misuse of parallel streams is the use of algorithms that mutate some shared state.
Here’s another way to implement the sum of the first n natural numbers but by mutating a shared accumulator:
It’s quite common to write this sort of code, especially for developers who are familiar with imperative programming paradigms.
This code closely resembles what you’re used to doing when iterating imperatively a list of numbers: you initialize an accumulator and traverse the elements in the list one by one, adding them on the accumulator.
What’s wrong with this code? Unfortunately, it’s irretrievably broken because it’s fundamentally sequential.
You have a data race on every access of total.
And if you try to fix that with synchronization, you’ll lose all your parallelism.
To understand this, let’s try to turn the Stream into a parallel one:
Try to run this last method with the harness of listing 7.1, also printing the result of each execution:
This time the performance of your method isn’t important: the only relevant thing is that each execution returns a different result, all very distant from the correct value of 50000005000000
This is caused by the fact that multiple threads are concurrently accessing the accumulator and The origin of the problem is that the method invoked inside the forEach block has the side effect of changing the mutable state of an object shared among multiple threads.
It’s mandatory to avoid these kinds of situations if you want to use parallel Streams without incurring similar bad surprises.
Now you know that shared mutable state doesn’t play well with parallel streams and with parallel computations in general.
For now, keep in mind that avoiding shared mutable state ensures that your parallel Stream will produce the right result.
Next, we’ll look at some practical advice you can use to figure out when it’s appropriate to use parallel streams to gain performance.
Nonetheless, it’s at least possible to provide some qualitative advice that could be useful when deciding whether it makes sense to use a parallel stream in a certain situation:
Turning a sequential stream into a parallel one is trivial but not always the right thing to do.
As we already demonstrated in this section, a parallel stream isn’t always faster than the corresponding sequential version.
Moreover, parallel streams can sometimes work in a counterintuitive way, so the first and most important suggestion when choosing between sequential and parallel streams is to always check their performance with an appropriate benchmark.
Java 8 includes primitive streams (IntStream, LongStream, and DoubleStream) to avoid such operations, so use them when possible.
Some operations naturally perform worse on a parallel stream than on a sequential stream.
In particular, operations such as limit and findFirst that rely on the order of the elements are expensive in a parallel stream.
For example, findAny will perform better than findFirst because it isn’t constrained to operate in the encounter order.
You can always turn an ordered stream into an unordered stream by invoking the method unordered on it.
So, for instance, if you need N elements of your stream and you’re not necessarily interested in the first N ones, calling limit on an unordered parallel stream may execute more efficiently than on a stream with an encounter order (for example, when the source is a List)
Consider the total computational cost of the pipeline of operations performed by the stream.
With N being the number of elements to be processed and Q the approximate cost of processing one of these elements through the stream pipeline, the product of N*Q gives a rough qualitative estimation of this cost.
A higher value for Q implies a better chance of good performance when using a parallel stream.
For a small amount of data, choosing a parallel stream is almost never a winning decision.
The advantages of processing in parallel only a few elements aren’t enough to compensate for the additional cost introduced by the parallelization process.
Take into account how well the data structure underlying the stream decomposes.
For instance, an ArrayList can be split much more efficiently than a LinkedList, because the first can be evenly divided without traversing it, as it’s necessary to do with the second.
Also, the primitive streams created with the range factory method can be decomposed quickly.
Finally, as you’ll learn in section 7.3, you can get full control of this decomposition process by implementing your own Spliterator.
The characteristics of a stream, and how the intermediate operations through the pipeline modify them, can change the performance of the decomposition process.
For example, a SIZED stream can be divided into two equal parts, and then each part can be processed in parallel more effectively, but a filter operation can throw away an unpredictable number of elements, making the size of the stream itself unknown.
Consider whether a terminal operation has a cheap or expensive merge step (for example, the combiner method in a Collector)
If this is expensive, then the cost caused by the combination of the partial results generated by each substream can outweigh the performance benefits of a parallel stream.
Table 7.1 gives a summary of the parallel-friendliness of certain stream sources in terms of their decomposability.
Finally, we need to emphasize that the infrastructure used behind the scenes by parallel streams to execute operations in parallel is the fork/join framework introduced in Java 7
The parallel summing example proved that it’s vital to have a good understanding of the parallel stream internals in order to use them correctly, so we’ll investigate in detail the fork/join framework in the next section.
The fork/join framework was designed to recursively split a parallelizable task into smaller tasks and then combine the results of each subtask to produce the overall result.
It’s an implementation of the ExecutorService interface, which distributes those subtasks to worker threads in a thread pool, called ForkJoinPool.
Let’s start by exploring how to define a task and subtasks.
To submit tasks to this pool, you have to create a subclass of RecursiveTask<R>, where R is the type of the result produced by the parallelized task (and each of its subtasks) or of RecursiveAction if the task returns no result (it could be updating other nonlocal structures, though)
To define RecursiveTasks you need only implement its single abstract method, compute:
This method defines both the logic of splitting the task at hand into subtasks and the algorithm to produce the result of a single subtask when it’s no longer possible or convenient to further divide it.
For this reason an implementation of this method often resembles the following pseudocode:
In general there are no precise criteria for deciding whether a given task should be further divided or not, but there are various heuristics that you can follow to help you with this decision.
The recursive task-splitting process is visually synthesized by figure 7.3
As you might have noticed, this is nothing more than the parallel version of the well-known divide-and-conquer algorithm.
To demonstrate a practical example of how to use the fork/join framework and to build on our previous examples, let’s try to calculate the sum of a range of numbers (here represented by an array of numbers long[]) using this framework.
As explained, you need to first provide an implementation for the RecursiveTask class, as shown by the ForkJoinSumCalculator in the following listing.
Writing a method performing a parallel sum of the first n natural numbers is now pretty straightforward.
You just need to pass the desired array of numbers to the constructor of ForkJoinSumCalculator:
Here, you generate an array containing the first n natural numbers using a LongStream.
Then you create a ForkJoinTask (the superclass of RecursiveTask), passing this array to the public constructor of the ForkJoinSumCalculator shown in listing 7.2
Finally, you create a new ForkJoinPool and pass that task to its invoke method.
The value returned by this last method is the result of the task defined by the Fork-JoinSumCalculator class when executed inside the ForkJoinPool.
Note that in a real-world application, it doesn’t make sense to use more than one ForkJoinPool.
For this reason, what you typically should do is instantiate it only once and keep this instance in a static field, making it a singleton, so it could be conveniently reused by any part of your software.
Here, to create it you’re using its default no-argument constructor, meaning that you want to allow the pool to use all the processors available to the JVM.
More precisely, this constructor will use the value returned by Runtime.availableProcessors to determine the number of threads used by the pool.
Note that the availableProcessors method, despite its name, in reality returns the number of available cores, including any virtual ones due to hyperthreading.
When you pass the ForkJoinSumCalculator task to the ForkJoinPool, this task is executed by a thread of the pool that in turn calls the compute method of the task.
This method checks to see if the task is small enough to be performed sequentially; otherwise, it splits the array of numbers to be summed into two halves and assigns them to two new ForkJoinSumCalculators that are scheduled to be executed by the ForkJoinPool.
As a result, this process can be recursively repeated, allowing the original task to be divided into smaller tasks, until the condition used to check if it’s no longer convenient or no longer possible to further split it is met (in this case, if the number of items to be summed is less than or equal to 10,000)
At this point, the result of each subtask is computed sequentially, and the (implicit) binary tree of tasks created by the forking process is traversed back toward its root.
The result of the task is then computed, combining the partial results of each subtask.
Once again you can check the performance of the summing method explicitly using the fork/join framework with the harness developed at the beginning of this chapter:
Here, the performance is worse than the version using the parallel stream, but only because you’re obliged to put the whole stream of numbers into a long[] before being allowed to use it in the ForkJoinSumCalculator task.
Even though the fork/join framework is relatively easy to use, unfortunately it’s also easy to misuse.
Here are a few best practices to leverage it effectively:
Invoking the join method on a task blocks the caller until the result produced by that task is ready.
For this reason, it’s necessary to call it after the computation of both subtasks has been started.
Otherwise, you’ll end up with a slower and more complex version of your original sequential algorithm because every subtask will have to wait for the other one to complete before starting.
The invoke method of a ForkJoinPool shouldn’t be used from within a RecursiveTask.
Instead, you should always call the methods compute or fork directly; only sequential code should use invoke to begin parallel computation.
Calling the fork method on a subtask is the way to schedule it on the ForkJoinPool.
It might seem natural to invoke it on both the left and right subtasks, but this is less efficient than just directly calling compute on one of them.
Doing this allows you to reuse the same thread for one of the two subtasks and avoid the overhead caused by the unnecessary allocation of a further task on the pool.
Debugging a parallel computation using the fork/join framework can be tricky.
In particular, it’s ordinarily quite common to browse a stack trace in your favorite IDE to discover the cause of a problem, but this can’t work with a fork-join computation because the call to compute occurs in a different thread than the conceptual caller, which is the code that called fork.
As you’ve discovered with parallel streams, you should never take for granted that a computation using the fork/join framework on a multicore processor is faster than the sequential counterpart.
We already said that a task should be decomposable into several independent subtasks in order to be parallelizable with a relevant performance gain.
All of these subtasks should take longer to execute than forking a new task; one idiom is to put I/O into one subtask and computation into another, thereby overlapping computation with I/O.
Moreover, you should consider other things when comparing the performance of the sequential and parallel versions of the same algorithm.
This is why it’s always important to run the program multiple times before to measure its performance, as we did in our harness.
Also be aware that optimizations built into the compiler could unfairly give an advantage to the sequential version (for example, by performing dead code analysis—removing a computation that’s never used)
The fork/join splitting strategy deserves one last note: you must choose the criteria used to decide if a given subtask should be further split or is small enough to be evaluated sequentially.
We give some hints about this in the next section.
In our ForkJoinSumCalculator example we decided to stop creating more subtasks when the array of numbers to be summed contained at most 10,000 items.
This is an arbitrary choice, but in most cases it’s difficult to find a good heuristic, other than trying to optimize it by making several attempts with different inputs.
In this specific case, that’s probably true because all tasks are CPU bound and are expected to take a similar amount of time.
But forking a quite large number of fine-grained tasks is in general a winning choice.
This is because ideally you want to partition the workload of a parallelized task in such a way that each subtask takes exactly the same amount of time, keeping all the cores of your CPU equally busy.
Unfortunately, especially in cases closer to real-world scenarios than the straightforward example we presented here, the time taken by each subtask can dramatically vary either due to the use of an inefficient partition strategy or because of unpredictable causes like slow access to the disk or the need to coordinate the execution with external services.
The fork/join framework works around this problem with a technique called work stealing.
In practice, this means that the tasks are more or less evenly divided on all the threads in the ForkJoinPool.
Each of these threads holds a doubly linked queue of the tasks assigned to it, and as soon as it completes a task it pulls another one from the head of the queue and starts executing it.
For the reasons we listed previously, one thread might complete all the tasks assigned to it much faster than the others, which means its queue will become empty while the other threads are still pretty busy.
In this case, instead of becoming idle, the thread randomly chooses a queue of a different thread and “steals” a task, taking it from the tail of the queue.
This process continues until all the tasks are executed, and then all the queues become empty.
That’s why having many smaller tasks, instead of only a few bigger ones, can help in better balancing the workload among the worker threads.
More generally, this work-stealing algorithm is used to redistribute and balance the tasks among the worker threads in the pool.
When a task in the queue of a worker is divided into two subtasks, one of the two subtasks is stolen by another idle worker.
As described previously, this process can continue recursively until the condition used to define that a given subtask should be executed sequentially becomes true.
It should now be clear how a stream can use the fork/join framework to process its items in parallel, but there’s still one missing ingredient.
In this section, we analyzed an example where you explicitly developed the logic to split an array of numbers into multiple tasks.
Nevertheless, you didn’t have to do anything similar when you used the parallel streams at the beginning of this chapter, and this means that there must be an automatic mechanism splitting the stream for you.
This new automatic mechanism is called the Spliterator, and we explore it in the next section.
Although you may not have to develop your own Spliterator in practice, understanding how to do so will give you a wider understanding about how parallel streams work.
Java 8 already provides a default Spliterator implementation for all the data structures included in its Collections Framework.
Collections now implements the interface Spliterator, which provides a method spliterator.
This interface defines several methods, as shown in the following listing.
As usual, T is the type of the elements traversed by the Spliterator.
The tryAdvance method behaves in a way similar to a normal Iterator in the sense that it’s used to sequentially consume the elements of the Spliterator one by one, returning true if there are still other elements to be traversed.
But the trySplit method is more specific to the Spliterator interface because it’s used to partition off some of its elements to a second Spliterator (the one returned by the method), allowing the two to be processed in parallel.
A Spliterator may also provide an estimation of the number of the elements remaining to be traversed via its estimateSize method, because even an inaccurate but quick-to-compute value can be useful to split the structure more or less evenly.
It’s important to understand how this splitting process is performed internally in order to take control of it when required.
Therefore, we analyze it in more detail in the next section.
The algorithm that splits a Stream into multiple parts is a recursive process and proceeds as shown in figure 7.6
In the first step trySplit is invoked on the first Spliterator and generates a second one.
Then in step 2 it’s called again on these two Spliterators, which results in a total of four.
The framework keeps invoking the method trySplit on a Spliterator until it returns null to signal that the data structure that it’s processing is no longer divisible, as shown in step 3
Finally, this recursive splitting process terminates in step 4 when all Spliterators have returned null to a trySplit invocation.
This splitting process can also be influenced by the characteristics of the Spliterator itself, which are declared via the characteristics method.
The last abstract method declared by the Spliterator interface is characteristics, which returns an int encoding the set of characteristics of the Spliterator itself.
The Spliterator clients can use these characteristics to better control and optimize its usage.
Unfortunately, although these conceptually overlap with characteristics of a collector, they’re coded differently.)
This implies that no elements can be added, removed, or modified during their traversal.
Now that you’ve seen what the Spliterator interface is and which methods it defines, you can try to develop your own implementation of a Spliterator.
Let’s look at a practical example of where you might need to implement your own Spliterator.
We’ll develop a simple method that counts the number of words in a String.
An iterative version of this method could be written as shown in the following listing.
Let’s put this method to work on the first sentence of Dante’s Inferno:[1]
Note that we added some additional random spaces in the sentence to demonstrate that the iterative implementation is working correctly even in the presence of multiple spaces between two words.
Ideally you’d like to achieve the same result in a more functional style because this way you’ll be able, as shown previously, to parallelize this process using a parallel Stream without having to explicitly deal with threads and their synchronization.
First, you need to convert the String into a stream.
Unfortunately, there are primitive streams only for int, long, and double, so you’ll have to use a Stream<Character>:
You can calculate the number of words by performing a reduction on this stream.
While reducing the stream, you’ll have to carry a state consisting of two variables: an int counting the number of words found so far and a boolean to remember if the last-encountered Character was a space or not.
Because Java doesn’t have tuples (a construct to represent an ordered list of heterogeneous elements without the need of a wrapper object), you’ll have to create a new class, WordCounter, which will encapsulate this state as shown in the following listing.
A class to count words while traversing a stream of Characters.
In this listing, the accumulate method defines how to change the state of the WordCounter, or more precisely with which state to create a new WordCounter because it’s an immutable class.
The method accumulate is called whenever a new Character of the Stream is traversed.
In particular, as you did in the countWordsIteratively method in listing 7.4, the counter is incremented when a new nonspace is met and the last character encountered is a space.
Figure 7.7 shows the state transitions of the WordCounter when a new Character is traversed by the accumulate method.
The state transitions of theWordCounterwhen a new Character c is traversed.
The second method, combine, is invoked to aggregate the partial results of two WordCounters operating on two different subparts of the stream of Characters, so it combines two WordCounters by summing their internal counters.
Now that you’ve encoded the logic of how to accumulate characters on a WordCounter and how to combine them in the WordCounter itself, writing a method that will reduce the stream of Characters is straightforward:
Now you can try this method with the stream created from the String containing the first sentence of Dante’s Inferno:
You can check that its output corresponds with the one generated by the iterative version:
So far, so good, but we said that one of the main reasons for implementing the WordCounter in functional terms was to be able to easily parallelize this operation, so let’s see how this works.
You could try to speed up the word-counting operation using a parallel stream, as follows:
Evidently something has gone wrong, but what? The problem isn’t hard to discover.
Because the original String is split at arbitrary positions, sometimes a word is divided in two and then counted twice.
In general, this demonstrates that going from a sequential stream to a parallel one can lead to a wrong result if this result may be affected by the position where the stream is split.
How can you fix this issue? The solution consists of ensuring that the String isn’t split at a random position but only at the end of a word.
To do this, you’ll have to implement a Spliterator of Character that splits a String only between two words, as shown in the following listing, and then creates the parallel stream from it.
This Spliterator is created from the String to be parsed and iterates over its Characters by holding the index of the one currently being traversed.
Let’s quickly revisit the methods of the WordCounterSpliterator implementing the Spliterator interface:
The tryAdvance method feeds the Consumer with the Character in the String at the current index position and increments this position.
The Consumer passed as argument is an internal Java class forwarding the consumed Character to the set of functions that have to be applied to it while traversing the stream, which in this case is only a reducing function, namely, the accumulatemethod of the WordCounter class.
The tryAdvance method returns true if the new cursor position is less than the total String length and there are further Characters to be iterated.
The trySplit method is the most important one in a Spliterator because it’s the one defining the logic used to split the data structure to be iterated.
As you did in the compute method of the RecursiveTask implemented in listing 7.1 (on how to use the fork/join framework), the first thing you have to do here is set a limit under which you don’t want to perform further splits.
Here, you use a very low limit of 10 Characters only to make sure that your program will perform some splits with the relatively short String you’re parsing, but in real-world applications you’ll have to use a higher limit, as you did in the fork/join example, to avoid creating too many tasks.
If the number of remaining Characters to be traversed is under this limit, you return null to signal that no further split is necessary.
Conversely, if you need to perform a split, you set the candidate split position to the half of the String chunk remaining to be parsed.
Once you find an opportune split position, you create a new Spliterator that will traverse the substring chunk going from the current position to the split one; you set the current position of this to the split one, because the part before it will be managed by the new Spliterator, and then you return it.
The estimatedSize of elements still to be traversed is the difference between the total length of the String parsed by this Spliterator and the position currently iterated.
Finally, the characteristic method signals to the framework that this Spliterator is ORDERED (the order is just the sequence of Characters in the String), SIZED (the value returned by the estimatedSize method is exact), SUBSIZED (the other Spliterators created by the trySplit method also have an exact size), NONNULL (there can be no null Characters in the String), and IMMUTABLE (no further Characters can be added while parsing the String because the String itself is an immutable class)
You can now use a parallel stream with this new WordCounterSpliterator as follows:
The second boolean argument passed to the StreamSupport.stream factory method means that you want to create a parallel stream.
You’ve seen how a Spliterator can let you to gain control over the policy used to split a data structure.
One last notable feature of Spliterators is the possibility of binding the source of the elements to be traversed at the point of first traversal, first split, or first query for estimated size, rather than at the time of its creation.
We’ve dedicated appendix C to showing how you can develop a utility class capable of performing multiple operations on the same stream in parallel using this feature.
Internal iteration allows you to process a stream in parallel without the need to explicitly use and coordinate different threads in your code.
Even if processing a stream in parallel is so easy, there’s no guarantee that doing so will make your programs run faster under all circumstances.
Behavior and performance of parallel software can sometimes be counterintuitive, and for this reason it’s always necessary to measure them and be sure that you’re not actually slowing your programs down.
Parallel execution of an operation on a set of data, as done by a parallel stream, can provide a performance boost, especially when the number of elements to be processed is huge or the processing of each single element is particularly time consuming.
From a performance point of view, using the right data structure, for instance, employing primitive streams instead of nonspecialized ones whenever possible, is almost always more important than trying to parallelize some operations.
The fork/join framework lets you recursively split a parallelizable task into smaller tasks, execute them on different threads, and then combine the results of each subtask in order to produce the overall result.
Spliterators define how a parallel stream can split the data it traverses.
In addition, it explores vital software development techniques such as design patterns, refactoring, testing, and debugging.
In chapter 9, you’ll learn what default methods are, how you can use them to evolve APIs in a compatible way, some practical usage patterns, and rules for using default methods effectively.
Chapter 10 covers the new java.util.Optional class, which allows you to both design better APIs and reduce null pointer exceptions.
Chapter 12 investigates the new Date and Time API, which greatly improves the previous error-prone APIs for working with dates and time.
In the first seven chapters of this book, you saw the expressive power of lambdas and the Streams API.
You were mainly creating new code that made use of these features.
This is great if you have to start a new Java project—you can use lambdas and streams immediately.
Unfortunately, you don’t always get to start a new project from scratch.
Most of the time you’ll have to deal with an existing codebase written in an older version of Java.
It presents several recipes showing how you can refactor existing code to make use of lambda expressions and gain more readability and flexibility.
In addition, we discuss how several object-oriented design patterns including strategy, template method, observer, chain of responsibility, and factory can be made more concise thanks to lambda expressions.
Finally, we explore how you can test and debug code that uses lambda expressions and the Streams API.
Right from the start of this book we’ve argued that lambda expressions can let you write more concise and flexible code.
It’smore concise because lambda expressions let you represent a piece of behavior in a more compact form in comparison to using anonymous classes.
We also showed in chapter 3 that method references let you write even more concise code when all you want to do is pass an existing method as argument to another method.
Your code is more flexible because lambda expressions encourage the style of behavior parameterization that we introduced in chapter 2
Your code can use and execute multiple behaviors passed as arguments to cope with requirement changes.
In this section, we bring it all together and show you simple steps you can follow to refactor code to gain readability and flexibility, using the features you learned in the previous chapters: lambdas, method references, and streams.
What does it mean to improve the readability of code? It’s hard to define what good readability means, because it can be very subjective.
There are a few steps you can take to make sure your code is understandable by other people, such as making sure your code is well documented and follows coding standards.
Java 8 features can also help improve code readability compared to previous versions:
You can reduce the verbosity of your code, making it easier to understand.
You can improve the intent of your code by using method references and the Streams API.
We describe three simple refactorings that use lambdas, method references, and streams, which you can apply to your code to improve its readability:
The first simple refactoring you should consider is converting uses of anonymous classes implementing one single abstract method to lambda expressions.
Why? We hope we convinced you in earlier chapters that anonymous classes are extremely verbose and error-prone.
By adopting lambda expressions, you produce code that is more succinct and readable.
For example, as shown in chapter 3, here’s an anonymous class for creating a Runnable object and its lambda expression counterpart:
But converting anonymous classes to lambda expressions can be a difficult process in certain situations.[1] First, the meanings of this and super are different for anonymous classes and lambda expressions.
Inside an anonymous class, this refers to the anonymous class itself, but inside a lambda it refers to the enclosing class.
Lambda expressions can’t (they’ll cause a compile error), as shown in the following code:
This excellent paper describes the process in more detail: http://dig.cs.illinois.edu/papers/lambda-Refactoring.pdf.
Finally, converting an anonymous class to a lambda expression can make the resulting code ambiguous in the context of overloading.
Indeed, the type of anonymous class is explicit at instantiation, but the type of the lambda depends on its context.
Let’s say you’ve declared a functional interface with the same signature as Runnable, here called Task (this might occur when you need interface names that are more meaningful in your domain model):
You can now pass an anonymous class implementing Task without a problem:
But converting this anonymous class to a lambda expression results in an ambiguous method call, because both Runnable and Task are valid target types:
You can solve the ambiguity by providing an explicit cast (Task):
Don’t be turned off by these issues though; there’s good news! Most integrated development environments (IDEs) such as NetBeans and IntelliJ support this refactoring and will automatically ensure these gotchas don’t arise.
Lambda expressions are great for short code that needs to be passed around.
But consider using method references when possible to improve code readability.
A method name states more clearly the intent of your code.
For example, in chapter 6 we showed you the following code to group dishes by caloric levels:
You can extract the lambda expression into a separate method and pass it as argument to groupingBy.
The code becomes more concise and its intent is now more explicit:
You need to add the method getCaloricLevel inside the Dish class itself for this to work:
In addition, consider making use of helper static methods such as comparing and maxBy when possible.
Moreover, for many common reduction operations such as sum, maximum there are built-in helper methods that can be combined with method references.
For example, we showed that using the Collectors API you can find the maximum or sum in a clearer way than using a combination of a lambda expression and a lower-level reduce operation.
Here we use the collector summingInt (names go a long way in documenting your code):
Ideally, you should try to convert all code that processes a collection with typical data processing patterns with an iterator to use the Streams API instead.
Why? The Streams API expresses more clearly the intent of a data processing pipeline.
In addition, streams can be optimized behind the scenes making use of short-circuiting and laziness, as well as leveraging your multicore architecture, as we explained in chapter 7
For example, the following imperative code expresses two patterns (filtering and extracting) that are mangled together, which forces the programmer to carefully understand the whole implementation before figuring out what the code does.
The alternative using the Streams API reads more like the problem statement, and it can be easily parallelized:
Unfortunately, converting imperative code to the Streams API can be a difficult task, because you need to think about control-flow statements such as break, continue, and return and infer the right stream operations to use.
The good news is that some tools can help you with this task as well.[2]
You can represent multiple different behaviors with different lambdas that you can then pass around to execute.
This style lets you cope with requirement changes (for example, creating multiple different ways of filtering with a Predicate or comparing with a Comparator)
We now look at a couple of patterns that you can apply to your codebase to immediately benefit from lambda expressions.
That sounds good, but in which situations? We discuss two common code patterns that can be refactored to leverage lambda expressions: conditional.
In addition, in the next section we show how many object-oriented design patterns such as strategy and template method can be rewritten more concisely using lambda expressions.
It’s common to see control-flow statements mangled inside business logic code.
For example, consider the following code that uses the built-in Java Logger class:
The state of the logger (what level it supports) is exposed in the client code through the method isLoggable.
Why should you have to query the state of the logger object every time before you can log a message? It just clutters your code.
A better alternative is to make use of the log method, which internally checks to see if the logger object is set to the right level before logging the message:
This is a better approach because your code isn’t cluttered with if checks, and the state of the logger is no longer exposed.
The logging message is always evaluated, even if the logger isn’t enabled for the message level passed as argument.
What you need is a way to defer the construction of the message so it can be generated only under a given condition (here, when the logger level is set to FINER)
It turns out that the Java 8 API designers knew about this problem and introduced an overloaded alternative to log that takes a Supplier as argument.
The log method will internally execute the lambda passed as argument only if the logger is of the right level.
The internal implementation of the log method is along the lines of this:
What’s the takeaway from the story? If you see yourself querying the state of an object many times in client code (for example, the state of the logger), only to call some method on this object with arguments (for example, log a message), then consider introducing a new method that calls that method (passed as a lambda or method reference) only after internally checking the state of the object.
Your code will be more readable (less clutter) and better encapsulated (the state of the object isn’t exposed in client code)!
In chapter 3 we discussed another pattern that you can adopt: execute around.
If you find yourself surrounding different code with the same preparation and cleanup phases, you can often pull that code into a lambda.
The benefit is that you reuse the logic dealing with the preparation and cleanup phases, thus reducing code duplication.
To refresh, here’s the code you saw in chapter 3
It reuses the same logic to open and close a file but can be parameterized with different lambdas to process the file:
This was made possible by introducing the functional interface BufferedReader-Processor, which lets you pass different lambdas to work with a BufferedReader object.
In this section, you’ve seen how to apply different recipes to improve the readability and flexibility of your code.
You’ll now see how lambda expressions can often remove boilerplate code associated with common object-oriented design patterns.
New language features often make existing code patterns or idioms less popular.
For example, the introduction of the for-each loop in Java 5 has replaced many uses of explicit iterators because it’s less error prone and more concise.
A specific class of patterns is called design patterns.[3] They’re a reusable blueprint, if you will, for a common problem when designing software.
It’s a bit like how construction engineers have a set of reusable solutions to construct bridges for specific scenarios (such as suspension bridge, arch bridge, and so on)
For example, the visitor design pattern is a common solution for separating an algorithm from a structure on which it needs to operate.
The singleton pattern is a common solution to restrict the instantiation of a class to only one object.
Lambda expressions provide yet another new tool in the programmer’s toolbox.
They can provide alternative solutions to the problems the design patterns are tackling but often with less work and in a simpler way.
Many existing object-oriented design patterns can be made redundant or written in a more concise way using lambda expressions.
We show how lambda expressions can provide an alternative way to solve the same problem each design pattern is intended for.
The strategy pattern is a common solution for representing a family of algorithms and letting you choose among them at runtime.
You briefly saw this pattern in chapter 2, when we showed you how to filter an inventory with different predicates (for example, heavy apples or green apples)
You can apply this pattern to a multitude of scenarios, such as validating an input with different criteria, using different ways of parsing, or formatting an input.
The strategy pattern consists of three parts, as illustrated in figure 8.1:
An interface to represent some algorithm (the interface Strategy)  One or more concrete implementations of that interface to represent multiple algorithms (the.
Let’s say you’d like to validate whether a text input is properly formatted for different criteria (for example, it consists of only lowercase letters or is numeric)
You start by defining an interface to validate the text (represented as a String):
Second, you define one or more implementation(s) of that interface:
You can then use these different validation strategies in your program:
By now you should recognize that ValidationStrategy is a functional interface (in addition, it has the same function descriptor as Predicate<String>)
This means that instead of declaring new classes to implement different strategies, you can pass lambda expressions directly, which are more concise:
As you can see, lambda expressions remove the boilerplate code inherent to the strategy design pattern.
If you think about it, lambda expressions encapsulate a piece of code (or strategy), which is what the strategy design pattern was created for, so we recommend that you use lambda expressions instead for similar problems.
The template method design pattern is a common solution when you need to represent the outline of an algorithm and have the additional flexibility to change certain parts of it.
Let’s look at an example of how this pattern works.
Say you need to write a simple online banking application.
Users typically enter a customer ID, and then the application fetches the customer’s details from the bank database and finally does something to make the customer happy.
Different online banking applications for different banking branches may have different ways of making a customer happy (for example, adding a bonus on their account or just sending them less paperwork)
You can write the following abstract class to represent the online banking application:
The processCustomer method provides a sketch for the online banking algorithm: fetch the customer given its ID and then make the customer happy.
Different branches can now provide different implementations of the method makeCustomerHappy by subclassing the OnlineBanking class.
You can tackle the same problem (creating an outline of an algorithm and letting implementers plug in some parts) using your favorite lambdas! The different components of the algorithms you want to plug in can be represented by lambda expressions or method references.
Here we introduce a second argument to the method processCustomer of type Consumer<Customer> because it matches the signature of the method makeCustomerHappy defined earlier:
You can now plug in different behaviors directly without subclassing the OnlineBanking class by passing lambda expressions:
This is another example of how lambda expressions can help you remove the boilerplate inherent to design patterns!
The observer design pattern is a common solution when an object (called the subject) needs to automatically notify a list of other objects (called observers) when some event happens (for example, a state change)
You typically come across this pattern when working with GUI applications.
You register a set of observers on a GUI component such as button.
If the button is clicked, the observers are notified and can execute a specific action.
For example, the observer design pattern is also suitable in a situation where several traders (observers) may wish to react to the change of price of a stock (subject)
Figure 8.2 illustrates the UML diagram of the observer pattern.
Let’s write some code to see how the observer pattern is useful in practice.
You’ll design and implement a customized notification system for an application like Twitter.
The concept is simple: several newspaper agencies (NY Times, The Guardian, and Le Monde) are subscribed to.
First, you need an Observer interface that groups the different observers.
It has just one method called notify that will be called by the subject (Feed) when a new tweet is available:
You can now declare different observers (here, the three newspapers) that produce a different action for each different keyword contained in a tweet:
You’re still missing the crucial part: the subject! Let’s define an interface for him:
The subject can register a new observer using the registerObserver method and notify his observers of a tweet with the notifyObservers method.
It’s a pretty straightforward implementation: the feed keeps an internal list of observers that it can then notify when a tweet arrives.
You can now create a demo application to wire up the subject and observers:
You may be wondering how lambda expressions are useful with the observer design pattern.
Notice that the different classes implementing the Observer interface are all providing implementation for a single method: notify.
They’re all just wrapping a piece of behavior to execute when a tweet arrives! Lambda expressions are designed specifically to remove that boilerplate.
Instead of instantiating three observer objects explicitly, you can pass a lambda expression directly to represent the behavior to execute:
But the observers may be more complex: they could have state, define several methods, and the like.
The chain of responsibility pattern is a common solution to create a chain of processing objects (such as a chain of operations)
One processing object may do some work and pass the result to another object, which then also does some work and passes it on to yet another processing object, and so on.
Generally, this pattern is implemented by defining an abstract class representing a processing object that defines a field to keep track of a successor.
Once it has finished its work, the processing object hands over its work to its successor.
Figure 8.3 illustrates the chain of responsibility pattern in UML.
Here you may recognize the template method design pattern, which we discussed in section 8.2.2
The method handle provides an outline of how to deal with a piece of work.
Different kinds of processing objects can be created by subclassing the class ProcessingObject and by providing an implementation for the method handleWork.
Let’s look at example of how to use this pattern.
You can create two processing objects doing some text processing:
You can now connect two processing objects to construct a chain of operations!
To chain them you just need to compose these functions by using the andThen method!
The factory design pattern lets you create objects without exposing the instantiation logic to the client.
For example, let’s say you’re working for a bank and they need a way of creating different financial products: loans, bonds, stocks, and so on.
Typically you’d create a Factory class with a method that’s responsible for the creation of different objects, as shown here:
The createProduct method could have additional logic to configure each created product.
But the benefit is that you can now create these objects without exposing the constructor and the configuration to the client, which makes the creation of products simpler for the client:
You saw in chapter 3 that you can refer to constructors just like you refer to methods, by using method references.
For example, here’s how to refer to the Loan constructor:
Using this technique, you could rewrite the previous code by creating a Map that maps a product name to its constructor:
You can now use this Map to instantiate different products, just as you did with the factory design pattern:
This is quite a neat way to make use of the Java 8 feature to achieve the same intent as the factory pattern.
But this technique doesn’t scale very well if the factory method createProduct needs to take multiple arguments to pass on to the product constructors! You’d have to provide a different functional interface than a simple Supplier.
For example, suppose you want to store constructors for products that take three arguments support this.
As a result, the signature of the Map becomes more complex:
You’ve seen how to write and refactor code using lambda expressions.
You’ll now see how you can ensure your new code is correct.
You’ve now sprinkled your code with lambda expressions, and it looks nice and concise.
But in most developer jobs you’re not paid for writing nice code but for writing code that’s correct.
Generally, good software engineering practice involves using unit testing to ensure that your program behaves as intended.
You write test cases, which assert that small individual parts of your source code are producing the expected results.
For example, consider a simple Point class for a graphical application:
The following unit test checks whether the method moveRightBy behaves as expected:
But lambdas don’t have a name (they’re anonymous functions, after all), so it’s trickier to test them in your code because you can’t refer to them by a name!
Sometime you may have access to a lambda via a field so you can reuse it, and you’d really like to test the logic encapsulated in that lambda.
What can you do? You could test the lambda just like when calling methods.
For example, let’s say you add a static field compareByXAndThenY in the Point class that gives you access to a Comparator object that’s generated from method references:
Remember that lambda expressions generate an instance of a functional interface.
As a result, you can test the behavior of that instance.
Here, you can now call the method compare on the Comparator object compareByXAndThenY with different arguments to test that its behavior is as intended:
But the purpose of lambdas is to encapsulate a one-off piece of behavior to be used by another method.
In that case you shouldn’t make lambda expressions available publicly; they’re only an implementation detail.
Instead, we argue that you should test the behavior of the method that uses a lambda expression.
Rather, you should focus on testing the behavior of the method moveAllPointsRightBy:
Note that in the unit test just shown, it’s important that the Point class implement the equals method appropriately; otherwise it will rely on the default implementation from Object!
Perhaps you come across a really complicated lambda expression that contains a lot of logic (for example, a technical pricing algorithm with corner cases)
You can then test the behavior of the new method in your test as you would with any regular method.
Methods that take a function as argument or return another function (so-called higher-order functions, explained more in chapter 14) are a little harder to deal with.
One thing you can do if a method takes a lambda as argument is test its behavior with different lambdas.
For example, you can test the filter method created in chapter 2 with different predicates:
What if the method that needs to be tested returns another function? You can test the behavior of that function by treating it as an instance of a functional interface, as we showed earlier with a Comparator.
Unfortunately, not everything works the first time, and your tests may report some errors related to your use of lambda expressions.
There are two main old-school weapons in a developer’s arsenal to debug problematic code:
Lambda expressions and streams can bring new challenges to your typical debugging routine.
When your program has stopped (for example, because an exception was thrown), the first thing you need to know is where it stopped and how it got there.
Each time your program performs a method call, information about the call is generated, including the location of the call in your program, the arguments of the call, and the local variables of the method being called.
When your program fails, you get a stack trace, which is a summary of how your program got to that failure, stack frame by stack frame.
In other words, you get a list of valuable method calls up to when the failure appeared.
Unfortunately, due to the fact that lambda expressions don’t have names, stack traces can be slightly puzzling.
Consider the following simple code made to fail on purpose:
Running it will produce a stack trace along the lines of this:
Because the error occurs in a stream pipeline, the whole sequence of method calls that make a stream pipeline work is exposed to you.
But notice that the stack trace produces the following cryptic lines:
They mean that the error occurred inside a lambda expression.
Unfortunately, because lambda expressions don’t have a name, the compiler has to make up a name to refer to them.
This can be problematic if you have large classes containing several lambda expressions.
Even if you use method references, it’s still possible that the stack won’t show you the name of Point::getX will also result in a problematic stack trace:
Note that if a method reference refers to a method declared in the same class as where it’s used, then it will appear in the stack trace.
In general, keep in mind that stack traces involving lambda expressions may be more difficult to understand.
This is an area where the compiler can be improved in a future version of Java.
Let’s say you’re trying to debug a pipeline of operations in a stream.
What can you do? You could use forEach to print or log the result of a stream as follows:
Unfortunately, once you call forEach, the whole stream is consumed.
What would be really useful is to understand what each operation (map, filter, limit) produces in the pipeline of a stream.
Its purpose is to execute an action on each element of a stream as it’s consumed.
But it doesn’t consume the whole stream like forEach does; it forwards the element it performed an action on to the next operation in the pipeline.
In the following code, you use peek to print the intermediate value before and after each operation in the stream pipeline:
This will produce a useful output at each step of the pipeline:
Following are the key concepts you should take away from this chapter:
Lambda expressions can make your code more readable and flexible.
Consider converting anonymous classes to lambda expressions, but be wary of subtle semantic.
Method references can make your code more readable compared to lambda expressions.
Consider converting iterative collection processing to use the Streams API.
Lambda expressions can help remove boilerplate code associated with several object-oriented design.
Lambda expressions can be unit tested, but in general you should focus on testing the behavior of the.
The peek method of a stream is useful to log intermediate values as they flow past at certain points in.
Traditionally, a Java interface groups related methods together into a contract.
Any class that implements an interface must provide an implementation for each method defined by the interface or inherit the implementation from a superclass.
But this causes a problem when library designers need to update an interface to add a new method.
Indeed, existing concrete classes (which may not be under their control) need to be modified to reflect the new interface contract.
This is particularly problematic because the Java 8 API introduces many new methods on existing interfaces, such as the sort method on the List interface that you used in previous chapters.
Imagine all the angry maintainers of alternative collection frameworks such as Guava and Apache Commons who now need to modify all the classes implementing the List interface to provide an implementation for the sort method too!
Java 8 introduces a new mechanism to tackle this problem.
It might sound surprising, but interfaces in Java 8 can now declare methods with implementation code; this can happen in two ways.
Second, Java 8 introduces a new feature called default methods that allows you to provide a default implementation for methods in an interface.
In other words, interfaces can provide concrete implementation for methods.
As a result, existing classes implementing an interface will automatically inherit the default implementations if they don’t provide one explicitly.
Two examples you’ve seen are sort in the List interface and stream in the Collection interface.
This is how you can tell that a method is a default method.
Here the sort method calls the Collections.sort method to perform the sorting.
Thanks to this new method, you can sort a list by calling the method directly:
It’s a new static method in the Comparator interface that returns a Comparator object to sort the elements in natural order (the standard alphanumerical sort)
The stream method in Collection you saw in chapter 4 looks like this:
Here the stream method, which you used extensively in previous chapters to process collections, calls the StreamSupport.stream method to return a stream.
Notice how the body of the stream method is calling the method spliterator, which is also a default method of the Collection interface.
But more important, why should you care about default methods? The main users of default methods are library designers.
As we explain later, default methods were introduced to evolve libraries such as the Java API in a compatible way, as illustrated in figure 9.1
In a nutshell, adding a method to an interface is the source of many problems; existing classes implementing the interface need to be changed to provide an implementation for the method.
If you’re in control of the interface and all the implementations, then it’s not too bad.
This is the motivation for default methods: they let classes automatically inherit a default implementation from an interface.
So if you’re a library designer, this chapter is important because default methods provide a means to evolve interfaces without causing modifications to existing implementations.
Also, as we explain later in the chapter, default methods can help structure your programs by providing a flexible mechanism for multiple inheritance of behavior: a class can inherit default methods from several interfaces.
Therefore, you may still be interested in finding out about default methods even if you’re not a library designer.
A common pattern in Java is to define both an interface and a utility companion class defining many static methods for working with instances of the interface.
For example, Collections is a companion class to deal with Collection objects.
Now that static methods can exist inside interfaces, such utility classes in your code can go away and their static methods can be moved inside an interface.
These companion classes will remain in the Java API in order to preserve backward compatibility.
We first walk you through a use case of evolving an API and the problems that can arise.
We then explain what default methods are and how they can tackle the problems faced in the use case.
Next, we show how you can create your own default methods to achieve a form of multiple inheritance in Java.
We conclude with some more technical information about how the Java compiler resolves possible ambiguities when a class inherits several default methods with the same signature.
To understand why it’s difficult to evolve an API once it’s been published, let’s say for the purpose of this section that you’re the designer of a popular Java drawing library.
Your library contains a Resizable interface that defines many methods a simple resizable shape must support: setHeight, setWidth, getHeight, getWidth, and setAbsoluteSize.
In addition, you provide several out-of-the-box implementations for it such as Square and Rectangle.
Because your library is so popular, you have some users who have created their own interesting implementations such as Ellipse using your Resizable interface.
A few months after releasing your API, you realize that Resizable is missing some features.
For example, it would be nice if the interface had a setRelativeSize method that takes as argument a growth factor to resize a shape.
You might say that it’s easy to fix: just add the setRelativeSize method to Resizable and update your implementations of Square and Rectangle.
This is the same problem that the Java library designers face when they need to.
Let’s look at an example in detail to see the consequences of modifying an interface that’s already been published.
The first version of your Resizable interface has the following methods:
One of your most loyal users decides to create his own implementation of Resizable called Ellipse:
He’s created a game that processes different types of Resizable shapes (including his own Ellipse):
After your library has been in use for a few months, you receive many requests to update your implementations of Resizable: Square, Rectangle, and so on to support the setRelativeSize method.
Recompiling the application produces errors because it depends on the Resizable interface.
Adding a new method to an interface is binary compatible; this means existing class file implementations will still run without the implementation of the new method, if there’s no attempt to recompile them.
In this case the game will still run (unless it’s recompiled) despite adding the method setRelativeSize to the Resizable interface.
Nonetheless, the user could modify the method Utils.paint in his game to use the method setRelativeSize because the paint method expects a list of Resizable objects as argument.
If an Ellipse object is passed, an error will be thrown at run-time because the setRelative-Size method isn’t implemented:
Second, if the user tries to rebuild his entire application (including Ellipse), he’ll get the following compile error:
This is why evolving existing APIs, such as the official Java Collections API, causes problems for users of the APIs.
There are alternatives to evolving an API, but they’re poor choices.
For example, you could create a separate version of your API and maintain both the old and the new versions, but this is inconvenient for several reasons.
First, it’s more complex for you to maintain as a library designer.
Second, your users may have to use both versions of your API in the same codebase, which impacts memory space and loading time because more class files are required for their projects.
They let library designers evolve APIs without breaking existing code because classes implementing an updated interface automatically inherit a default implementation.[1]
There are three main kinds of compatibility when introducing a change to a Java program: binary, source, and behavioral compatibilities.1 You saw that adding a method to an interface is binary compatible but results in a compiler error if the class implementing the interface is.
It’s good to know the different kinds of compatibilities, so let’s examine them in more detail.
Binary compatibility means existing binaries running without errors continue to link (which involves verification, preparation, and resolution) without error after introducing a change.
For example, just adding a method to an interface is binary compatible because if it’s not called, existing methods of the interface can still run without problems.
In its simplest form, source compatibility means an existing program will still compile after introducing a change.
For example, adding a method to an interface isn’t source compatible; existing implementations won’t recompile because they need to implement the new method.
Finally, behavioral compatibility means running a program after a change with the same inputs results in the same behavior.
For example, adding a method to an interface is behavioral compatible because the method is never called in the program (or it gets overridden by an implementation)
You’ve seen how adding methods to a published API disrupts existing implementations.
Default methods are a new feature added in Java 8 to help evolve APIs in a compatible way.
An interface can now contain method signatures for which an implementing class doesn’t provide an implementation.
So who implements them? The missing method bodies are given as part of the interface (hence default implementations) rather than in the implementing class.
So how do you recognize a default method? It’s very simple.
It starts with a default modifier and contains a body just like a method declared in a class.
For example, in the context of a collection library, you could define an interface Sized with one abstract method size and a default method isEmpty as follows:
Now any class that implements the Sized interface will automatically inherit the implementation of isEmpty.
Consequently, adding a method to an interface with a default implementation isn’t a source incompatibility.
Let’s go back to our initial example of the Java drawing library and your game.
Concretely, to evolve your library in a compatible way (which means the users of your library don’t have to modify all their classes that implement Resizable), use a default method and provide a default implementation for setRelativeSize:
Because interfaces can now have methods with implementation, does that mean multiple inheritance has arrived in Java? What happens if an implementing class also defines the same method signature or if default methods can be overridden? Don’t worry about these issues for now; there are a few rules to follow and mechanisms available for you to deal with these issues.
You may have guessed that default methods are used extensively in the Java 8 API.
You saw in the introduction of this chapter that the stream method in the Collection interface we used extensively in previous chapters is a default method.
The sort method in the List interface is also a default method.
Many of the functional interfaces we presented in chapter 3 such as Predicate, Function, and Comparator also introduced new default methods such as Predicate.and or Function.andThen (remember, a functional interface contains only one abstract method; default methods are non-abstract methods)
So what’s the difference between an abstract class and an interface? They both can contain abstract methods and methods with a body.
First, a class can extend only from one abstract class, but a class can implement multiple interfaces.
Second, an abstract class can enforce a common state through instance variables (fields)
To put your knowledge of default methods to use, have a go at Quiz 9.1
For this quiz, pretend you’re one of the masters of the Java language and API.
You’ve received many requests for a removeIf method to use on ArrayList, TreeSet, LinkedList, and all other collections.
The removeIf method should remove all elements from a collection that match a given predicate.
Your task in this quiz is to figure out the best way to enhance the Collections API with this new method.
What’s the most disruptive way to enhance the Collections API? You could copy and paste the implementation of removeIf in each concrete class of the Collections API, but that would be a crime to the Java community.
What else can you do? Well, all of the Collection classes implement an interface called java.util.Collection.
Great; can you add a method there? Yes; you just learned that default methods are a way to add implementations inside an interface in a source-compatible way.
And all classes implementing Collection (including classes from your users that aren’t part of the Collections API) will be able to use the implementation of removeIf.
The code solution for removeIf is as follows (which is roughly the implementation in the official Java 8 Collections API)
You’ve seen how default methods can be useful to evolve a library in a compatible way.
Is there anything else you can do with them? You can create your own interfaces that have default methods too.
You may want to do this for two use cases that we explore in this section: optional methods andmultiple inheritance of behavior.
It’s likely you’ve come across classes that implement an interface but leave empty some method implementations.
It defines hasNext and next but also the remove method.
Prior to Java 8, remove was often ignored because the user decided not to use that capability.
As a result, many classes implementing Iterator have an empty implementation for remove, which results in unnecessary boilerplate code.
With default methods, you can provide a default implementation for such methods, so concrete classes don’t need to explicitly provide an empty implementation.
For example, the Iterator interface in Java 8 provides a default implementation for remove as follows:
Any class implementing the Iterator interface doesn’t need to declare an empty remove method anymore to ignore it, because it now has a default implementation.
Default methods enable something that wasn’t possible in an elegant way before: multiple inheritance of behavior.
This is the ability of a class to reuse code from multiple places, as illustrated in figure 9.3
Remember that classes in Java can inherit from only one other class, but classes have always been allowed to implement multiple interfaces.
To confirm, here’s how the class ArrayList is defined in the Java API:
Here, ArrayList is extending one class and implementing six interfaces.
So in a sense we already have multiple inheritance of types.
Because interface methods can have implementations in Java 8, classes can inherit behavior (implementation code) from multiple interfaces.
Let’s explore an example to see how you can use this capability to your benefit.
Keeping interfaces minimal and orthogonal lets you achieve great reuse and composition of behavior inside your codebase.
Let’s say you need to define several shapes with different characteristics for the game you’re creating.
Some shapes should be resizable but not rotatable; some should be rotatable and moveable but not resizable.
You can start by defining a standalone Rotatable interface with two abstract methods, setRotationAngle and getRotationAngle.
The interface also declares a default rotateBy method that can be implemented using the setRotationAngle and get-RotationAngle methods as follows:
This technique is somewhat related to the template design pattern where a skeleton algorithm is defined in terms of other methods that need to be implemented.
Now, any class that implements Rotatable will need to provide an implementation for setRotationAngle and getRotationAngle but will inherit the default implementation of rotateBy for free.
Similarly, you can define two interfaces, Moveable and Resizable, that you saw earlier.
You can now create different concrete classes for your game by composing these interfaces.
The Monster class will automatically inherit the default methods from the Rotatable, Moveable, and Resizable interfaces.
In this case, Monster inherits the implementations of rotateBy, moveHorizontally, moveVertically, and setRelativeSize.
Say you now need to declare another class that’s moveable and rotatable but not resizable, such as the sun.
There’s no need to copy and paste code; you can reuse the default implementations from the Moveable and Rotatable interfaces as shown here.
Here’s another advantage of defining simple interfaces with default implementations like the ones for your game.
Let’s say you need to modify the implementation of moveVertically to make it more efficient.
You can now change its implementation directly in the Moveable interface, and all classes implementing it will automatically inherit the code (provided they didn’t implement the method themselves)!
Inheritance shouldn’t be your answer to everything when it comes down to reusing code.
For example, inheriting from a class that has 100 methods and fields just to reuse one method is a bad idea, because it adds unnecessary complexity.
You’d be better off using delegation: create a method that calls directly the method of the class you need via a member variable.
This is why you’ll sometime find classes that are declared “final” intentionally: they can’t be inherited from to prevent this kind of antipattern or have their core behavior messed with.
Note that sometimes final classes have a place; for example, String is final because we don’t want anybody to be able to interfere with such core functionality.
The same idea is applicable to interfaces with default methods.
By keeping your interface minimal, you can achieve greater composition because you can select only the implementations you need.
You’ve seen that default methods are useful for many usage patterns.
As you know, in Java a class can extend only one parent class but implement multiple interfaces.
With the introduction of default methods in Java 8, there’s the possibility of a class inheriting more than one method with the same signature.
Which version of the method should be used? Such conflicts will probably be quite rare in practice, but when they do occur there must be rules that specify how to deal with the conflict.
This section explains how the Java compiler resolves such potential conflicts.
In addition, you may have heard of the diamond problem in C++ where a class can inherit two methods with the same signature.
There are three rules to follow when a class inherits a method with the same signature from multiple places (such as another class or interface):
A method declaration in the class or a superclass takes priority over any default method declaration.
Otherwise, sub-interfaces win: the method with the same signature in the most specific default-providing interface is selected.
Finally, if the choice is still ambiguous, the class inheriting from multiple interfaces has to explicitly select which default method implementation to use by overriding it and calling the desired method explicitly.
We promise, these are the only rules you need to know! Let’s now look at some examples.
Let’s revisit our example from the beginning of this section where C implements both B and A, which define a default method called hello.
Because B is more specific than A, the hello from B is selected.
Now, consider what would happen if C were inheriting from D as follows (illustrated in figure 9.6):
Rule 1 says that a method declaration in the class takes priority.
Rule 2 says that if there are no methods in the class or superclass, then the method with the most specific default-providing interface is selected.
The compiler therefore has the choice between the hello method from interface A and the hello method from interface B.
To check your understanding of the resolution rules, try Quiz 9.2
For this quiz, let’s reuse the previous example except that D explicitly overrides the hello method from A.
The examples you’ve seen so far could be resolved using the first two resolution rules.
Let’s say now that B doesn’t extend A anymore (illustrated in figure 9.7):
Rule 2 doesn’t help you now because there’s no more-specific interface to select.
Both hello methods from A and B could be valid options.
Thus, the Java compiler will produce a compile error because it doesn’t know which method is more suitable: “Error: class C inherits unrelated.
There aren’t many solutions to resolve the conflict between the two possible valid methods; you have to explicitly decide which method declaration you want C to use.
To do this, you can override the hello method in class C and then in its body explicitly call the method you wish to use.
Java 8 introduces the new syntax X.super.m(...) where X is the superinterface whose method m you want to call.
For example, if you want C to use the default method from B, it looks like this:
Have a go at Quiz 9.3 to investigate another related tricky case.
For this quiz, assume interfaces A and B are declared as follows:
Let’s consider a final scenario that sends shivers through the C++ community:
It’s called a diamond problem because the shape of the diagram resembles a diamond.
Because B is more specific than A, the default method declaration from B will be selected.
If both B and C declare a hello method with the same signature, you have a conflict and need to solve it explicitly, as we showed earlier.
Just as a side note, you may be wondering what happens if you add an abstract hello method (one that’s not default) in interface C as follows (still no methods in A and B):
The new abstract hello method in C takes priority over the default hello method from interface A because C is more specific.
Therefore, class D now needs to provide an explicit implementation for hello; otherwise the program won’t compile.
By default, if a class D inherits from classes B and C, and classes B and C both inherit from A, then class D will actually have access to a copy of a B object and a copy of a C object.
As a result, uses of methods from A have to be explicitly qualified: are they coming from B or are they coming from C? In addition, classes have state, so modifying member variables from B isn’t reflected on the copy of the C object.
You’ve seen that the default method’s resolution mechanism is pretty simple if a class inherits from several methods with the same signature.
You just need to follow three rules systematically to solve all possible conflicts:
First, an explicit method declaration in the class or a superclass takes priority over any default method declaration.
Otherwise, the method with the same signature in the most specific default-providing interface is selected.
Finally, if there’s still a conflict, you have to explicitly override the default methods and choose which one your class should use.
Following are the key concepts you should take away from this chapter:
Interfaces in Java 8 can have implementation code through default methods and static methods.
Default methods start with a default keyword and contain a body like class methods do.
Adding an abstract method to a published interface is a source incompatibility.
Default methods help library designers evolve APIs in a backward-compatible way.
Default methods can be used for creating optional methods and multiple inheritance of behavior.
There are resolution rules to resolve conflicts when a class inherits from several default methods with.
A method declaration in the class or a superclass takes priority over any default method declaration.
Otherwise, the method with the same signature in the most specific default-providing interface is selected.
When two methods are equally specific, a class can explicitly override a method and select which one to call.
Raise your hand if you ever got a NullPointerException during your life as a Java developer.
Keep it up if this is the Exception you encounter most frequently.
Unfortunately, we can’t see you at this moment, but we believe there’s a very high probability that your hand is raised now.
We also guess you may possibly be thinking something like “Yes, I agree, NullPointerExceptions are a pain for any Java developer, novice, or expert, but there’s not much we can do about them, because this is the price we pay to use such a convenient, and maybe unavoidable, construct as null references.” This is a common feeling in the (imperative) programming world; nevertheless, it may not be the whole truth but more likely a bias with solid historical roots.
In reality, Hoare’s statement could underestimate the costs incurred by millions of developers fixing bugs caused by null references in the last 50 years.
Notable exceptions include most typed functional languages, such as Haskell and ML; these include algebraic data types that allow data types to be succinctly expressed, including explicit specification of whether special values such as null are to be included on a type-by-type basis.
Imagine you have the following nested object structure for a person owning a car and having car insurance.
This code looks pretty reasonable, but many people don’t own a car.
So what’s the result of calling the method getCar? A common unfortunate practice is to return the null reference to indicate the absence of a value, here to indicate the absence of a car.
As a consequence, the call to getInsurance will return the insurance of a null reference, which will result in a NullPointerException at run-time and stop your program from running further.
What can you do to avoid running into an unexpected NullPointerException? Typically, you can add null checks where necessary (and sometimes, in an excess of defensive programming, even where not necessary) and often with different styles.
A first attempt to write a method preventing a NullPointerException is shown in the following listing.
This method performs a null check every time it dereferences a variable, returning the string “Unknown” if any of the variables traversed in this dereferencing chain is a null value.
The only exception to this is that you’re not checking to see if the name of the insurance company is null because, like any other company, you know it must have a name.
Note that you can avoid this last check only because of your knowledge of the business domain, but that isn’t reflected in the Java classes modeling your data.
This clearly scales poorly and compromises the readability, so maybe you’d like to attempt another solution.
Let’s try to avoid this problem by doing something different in the next listing.
In this second attempt, you try to avoid the deeply nested if blocks, adopting a different strategy: every time you meet a null variable, you return the string “Unknown.” Nevertheless, this solution is also far from ideal; now the method has four distinct exit points, making it hardly maintainable.
Furthermore, it’s an error-prone process; what if you forget to check that one property could be null? We argue in this chapter that using null to represent the absence of a value is the wrong approach.
What you need is a better way to model the absence and presence of a value.
To recap our discussion so far, the use of null references in Java causes both theoretical and practical problems:
It’s a source of error.NullPointerException is by far the most common exception in Java.
It worsens readability by making it necessary to fill your code with often deeply.
It doesn’t have any semantic meaning, and in particular it represents the wrong way.
Java always hides pointers from developers except in one case: the null.
This is a problem because, when it’s propagated to another part of the system, you have no idea what that null was initially supposed to be.
To provide some context for what other solutions are out there for this problem, let’s briefly look at what other programming languages have to offer.
In recent years other languages like Groovy worked around this problem by introducing a safe navigation operator, represented by ?., to safely navigate through potentially null values.
To understand how this works, consider the following Groovy code to retrieve the name of the insurance company used by a given person to insure their car:
A person might not have a car and you tend to model this possibility by assigning a null to the car reference of the Person object.
The Groovy safe navigation operator allows you to safely navigate through these potentially null references without throwing a NullPointerException, by just propagating the null reference through the invocations chain, returning a null in the event that any value in the chain is a null.
A similar feature was proposed and then discarded for Java 7
Somehow, though, we don’t seem to miss a safe navigation operator in Java; the first temptation of all Java developers when confronted with a NullPointerException is to quickly fix it by adding an if statement, checking that a value is not null before invoking a method on it.
If you solve this problem in this way, without wondering if it’s correct that your algorithm or your data model could present a null value in that specific situation, you’re not fixing a bug but hiding it, making its discovery and fix far more difficult for whoever will be called to work on it next time; it very likely will be you in the next week or month.
Groovy’s null-safe dereferencing operator is only a bigger and more powerful broom for making this mistake, without worrying too much about its consequences.
Other functional languages, such as Haskell and Scala, take a different view.
Haskell includes a Maybe type, which essentially encapsulates an optional value.
A value of type Maybe can contain either a value of a given type or nothing.
You then have to explicitly check whether a value is present or.
Okay, we diverged a bit, and all this sounds fairly abstract.
We also clarify how this migration from nulls to Optionals requires you to rethink the way you deal with optional values in your domain model.
Finally, we explore the features of this new Optional class and provide a few practical examples showing how to use it effectively.
When a value is present, the Optional class just wraps it.
Conversely, the absence of a value is modeled with an “empty” optional returned by the method Optional.empty.
It’s a static factory method that returns a special singleton instance of the Optional class.
You might wonder what seen as the same thing, but in practice the difference is huge: trying to dereference a null will of type Optional that can be invoked in useful ways.
An important, practical semantic difference in using optionals instead of nulls is that in the first case, declaring a variable of type Optional<Car> instead of Car clearly signals that a missing value is permitted there.
Conversely, always using the type Car and possibly assigning a null reference to a variable of that type implies you don’t have any help, other than your knowledge of the business model, to understand whether the null belongs to the valid domain of that given variable or not.
With this in mind, you can rework the original model from listing 10.1, using the Optional class as follows.
Note how the use of the Optional class enriches the semantics of your model.
At the same time, the fact that the name of the insurance company is declared of type String instead of Optional<String> makes it evident that it’s mandatory for an insurance company to have a name.
This way you know for certain whether you’ll get a NullPointerException when dereferencing the name of an insurance company; you don’t have to add a null check because doing so will just hide the problem instead of fixing it.
An insurance company must have a name, so if you find one without, you’ll have to work out what’s wrong in your data instead of adding a piece of code covering up this circumstance.
Using optionals consistently disambiguates beyond any doubt the case of a value that can be structurally missing from the case of a value that’s absent only because of a bug in your algorithm or a problem in your data.
It’s important to note that the intention of the Optional class is not to replace every single null reference.
Instead, its purpose is to help you design more-comprehensible APIs so that by just reading the signature of.
This forces you to actively unwrap an optional to deal with the absence of a value.
So far, so good; you’ve learned how to employ optionals in types to clarify your domain model and the advantages this offers over representing missing values with null references.
The first step before working with Optional is to learn how to create optional objects! There are several ways.
As mentioned earlier, you can get hold of an empty optional object using the static factory method Optional.empty:
You can also create an optional from a non-null value with the static factory method Optional.of:
If car were null, a NullPointerException would be immediately thrown (rather than getting a latent error once you try to access properties of the car)
Finally, by using the static factory method Optional.ofNullable, you can create an Optional object that may hold a null value:
If car were null, the resulting Optional object would be empty.
But get raises an exception when the optional is empty, and so using it in an ill-disciplined manner effectively re-creates all the maintenance problems caused by using null.
So instead we start by looking at ways of using optional values that avoid explicit tests; these are inspired by similar operations on streams.
A common pattern is to extract information from an object.
For example, you may want to extract the name from an insurance company.
You’d need to check whether insurance is null before extracting the name as follows:
It works as follows (from here on we use the model presented in listing 10.4):
The map operation applies the provided function to each element of a stream.
You could also think of an Optional object as a particular collection of data, containing at most a single element.
If the Optional contains a value, then the function passed as argument to map transforms that value.
Figure 10.2 illustrates this similarity, showing what happens when passing a function that transforms a square into a triangle to the map methods of both a stream of square and an optional of square.
This looks useful, but how could you use this to write the previous code, which was chaining several method calls in a safe way?
We have to look at another method supported by Optional called flatMap!
Because you’ve just learned how to use map, your first reaction may be that you can rewrite the previous code using map as follows:
This means the result of the map operation is an object of type Optional<Optional<Car>>
As a result, the call to getInsurance is invalid because the outermost optional contains as its value another optional, which of course doesn’t support the getInsurance method.
So how can we solve this problem? Again, we can look at a pattern you’ve used previously with streams: the flatMap method.
With streams, the flatMap method takes a function as an argument, which returns another stream.
This function is applied to each element of a stream, which would result in a stream of streams.
But flatMap has the effect of replacing each generated stream by the contents of that stream.
In other words, all the separate streams that are generated by the function get amalgamated or flattened into a single stream.
What you want here is something similar, but you want to flatten a two-level optional into one.
Here the function passed to the stream’s flatMap method transforms each square into another stream containing two triangles.
The result of a simple map would then be a stream containing three other streams, each of them having two triangles, but the flatMap method flattens this two-level stream into a single stream containing six triangles in total.
If this function was passed to the map method, the result would be an optional containing another optional that, in turn, contains a triangle, but the flatMap method flattens this two-level optional into a single optional containing a triangle.
Now that you know the theory of the map and flatMap methods of Optional, let’s put them into practice.
Comparing listing 10.5 with the two former attempts shows the advantages of using optionals when dealing with potentially missing values.
This time, you can obtain what you want with an easily comprehensible statement—instead of increasing the code complexity with conditional branches.
In implementation terms, first note that you modify the signature of the getCarInsuranceName method from listings 10.2 and 10.3, because we explicitly said there could also be a case where a nonexistent Person is passed to this method, such as when that Person is retrieved from a database using an identifier, and you want to model the possibility that no Person exists in your data for the given identifier.
You model this additional requirement, changing the type of the method’s argument from Person to Optional<Person>
Once again this approach allows you to make explicit through the type system something that otherwise would remain implicit in your knowledge of the domain model, namely, you should never forget that the first purpose of a language, even a programming language, is communication.
Starting with this Optional<Person>, the Car from the Person, the Insurance from the Car, and the String containing the insurance company name from the Insurance are dereferenced with a combination of the map and flatMap methods introduced earlier.
Here you begin with the optional wrapping the Person and invoking flatMap(Person::getCar)on it.
As we said, you can logically think of this invocation as something that happens in two steps.
In step 1, a Function is applied to the Person inside the optional to transform it.
In this case, the Function is expressed with a method reference invoking the method getCar on that Person.
Because that method returns an Optional<Car>, the Person inside the optional is transformed into an instance of that type, resulting in a two-level optional that’s flattened as part of the flatMap operation.
From a theoretical point of view, you can think of this flattening operation as the operation that combines two optionals, resulting in an empty optional, if at least one of them is empty.
What happens in reality is that if you invoke flatMap on an empty optional, nothing is changed, and it’s returned as is.
Conversely, if the optional wraps a Person, the Function passed to the flatMap method is applied to that Person.
Because the value produced by that Function application is already an optional, the flatMap method can return it as is.
At this point the resulting optional will be empty if any of the methods in this invocation chain returns an empty optional or will contain the desired insurance company name otherwise.
In listing 10.5, we used another method called orElse, which provides a default value in case the optional is empty.
There are many methods to provide default actions or unwrap an optional.
Using optionals in a domain model and why they’re not Serializable.
In listing 10.4, we showed how to use Optionals in your domain model in order to mark with a specific type the values that are allowed to be missing or remain undefined.
However, the designers of the Optional class developed it from different assumptions and with a different use case in mind.
In particular, Java Language Architect Brian Goetz clearly stated the purpose of Optional is to support the optional-return idiom only.
Because the Optional class wasn’t intended for use as a field type, it also doesn’t implement the Serializable interface.
For this reason, using Optionals in your domain model could break applications using tools or frameworks that require a serializable model to work.
Nevertheless, we believe that we showed why using Optionals as a proper type in your domain is a good idea, especially when you have to traverse a graph of objects that could be, all or in part, potentially not present.
Alternatively, if you need to have a serializable domain model, we suggest you at least provide a method allowing access also to any possibly missing value as an optional, as in the following example:
We decided to read this value using the orElse method that allows you to also provide a default value that will be returned in the case of an empty optional.
The Optional class provides several instance methods to read the value contained by an Optional instance.
For this reason, using this method is almost always a bad idea unless you’re really sure the optional contains a value.
In addition, it’s not much of an improvement over nested null checks.
You should use this method either when the default value is time-consuming to create (to gain a little efficiency) or you want to be sure this is done only if the optional is empty (in which case it’s strictly necessary)
The analogies between the Optional class and the Stream interface aren’t limited to the map and flatMap methods.
There’s a third method, filter, that behaves in a similar fashion, and we explore it in section 10.3.6
Let’s now suppose that you have a method that given a Person and a Car queries some external services and implements some quite complex business logic to find the insurance company offering the cheapest policy for that combination:
Let’s also suppose that you want to develop a null-safe version of this method taking two optionals as arguments and then returning an Optional<Insurance> that will be empty if at least one of the values passed in to it is also empty.
The Optional class also provides an isPresent method returning true if the optional contains a value, so your first attempt could be to implement this method as follows:
This method has the advantage of making clear in its signature that both the person and the car values passed to it could be missing and that for this reason it couldn’t return any value.
Unfortunately, its implementation resembles too closely the null checks that you’d write if the method took as arguments a Person and a Car and both those arguments could be potentially null.
Using a combination of the map and flatMap methods you learned in this section, rewrite the.
You can implement that method in a single statement and without using any conditional constructs like the ternary operator as follows:
Here you invoke a flatMap on the first optional, so if this is empty, the lambda expression passed to it won’t be executed at all and this invocation will just return an empty optional.
Conversely, if the person is present, it uses it as the input of a Function returning an Optional<Insurance> as required by the flatMap method.
The body of this function invokes a map on the second optional, so if it doesn’t contain any car, the Function will return an empty optional and so will the whole nullSafeFindCheapestInsurance method.
Finally, if both the person and the car are present, the lambda expression passed as argument to the map method can safely invoke the original findCheapestInsurance method with them.
The analogies between the Optional class and the Stream interface aren’t limited to the map and flatMap methods.
There’s a third method, filter, that behaves in a similar fashion on both classes, and we explore it next.
Often you need to call a method on an object and check some property.
For example, you might need to check whether the insurance’s name is equal to “Cambridge-Insurance.” To do this in a safe way, you first need to check whether the reference pointing to an Insurance object is null and then call the getName method, as follows:
This pattern can be rewritten using the filter method on an Optional object, as follows:
If a value is present in the Optional object and it matches the predicate, the filter method returns that value; otherwise, it returns an empty Optional object.
If you remember that you can think of an optional as a stream containing at most a single element, the behavior of this method should be pretty clear.
If the optional is already empty, it doesn’t have any effect; otherwise, it applies the predicate to the value.
If this application returns true, the optional returns unchanged; otherwise, the value is filtered away, leaving the optional empty.
You can test your understanding of how the filter method works by working through Quiz 10.2
Supposing the Person class of our Person/Car/Insurance model also has a method getAge to access the age of the person, modify the getCarInsuranceName method in listing 10.5 using the following signature.
You can filter from the Optional the person it eventually contains if the age of the person is greater than the minAge argument by encoding this condition in a predicate and passing this predicate to the filter method as follows:
In the next section, we investigate the remaining features of the Optional class and give more practical examples showing various techniques you could use to reimplement the code you write to manage missing values.
As you’ve learned, effective use of the new Optional class implies a complete rethink of how you deal with potentially missing values.
This rethink involves not only the code you write but, possibly even more important, how you interact with native Java APIs.
Indeed, we believe that many of those APIs would have been written differently if the Optional class had been available at the time they were developed.
For backward-compatibility reasons, old Java APIs can’t be changed to make proper use of optionals, but all is not lost.
You can fix, or at least work around, this issue by adding into your code small utility methods that allow you to benefit from the power of optionals.
You’ll see how to do this with a couple of practical examples.
An existing Java API almost always returns a null to signal the absence of the required value or that the computation to obtain it failed for some reason.
For instance, the get method of a Map returns null as its value if it contains no mapping for the requested key.
But for the reasons we listed earlier, in most cases like this, you’d prefer that these methods could return an optional.
You can’t modify the signature of these methods, but you can easily wrap the value they return with an optional.
You can do this in two ways: either with an ugly if-then-else adding to code complexity or by using the method Optional.ofNullable that we discussed earlier:
You can use this method every time you want to safely transform a value that could be potentially null into an optional.
Throwing an exception is another common alternative in the Java API to returning a null when, for any reason, a value can’t be provided.
A typical example of this is the conversion of String into an int, provided by the Integer.parseInt(String) static method.
In this case, if the String doesn’t contain a parseable integer, this method throws a NumberFormatException.
The net effect is once again that the code signals an invalid argument in the case of a String not representing an integer, the only difference being that this time you have to check it with a try/catch block instead of using an if condition controlling whether a value is not null.
You could also model the invalid value caused by nonconvertible Strings with an empty optional, so you’d prefer that parseInt could return an optional.
You can’t change the original Java method, but nothing prevents you from implementing a tiny utility method, wrapping it, and returning an optional as desired, as shown in this next listing.
Our suggestion is to collect several methods similar to this in a utility class; let’s call it OptionalUtility.
In this way, from now on you’ll always be allowed to convert a String into an Optional<Integer>, using this OptionalUtility.stringToInt method.
You can forget that you encapsulated the ugly try/catch logic in it.
In chapter 5, we encouraged the use of primitive streams, especially when they could contain a huge number of elements, for performance reasons, but because an Optional can have at most a single value, that justification doesn’t apply here.
We discourage using primitive optionals because they lack the map, flatMap, and filter methods, which, as you saw in section 10.2, are the most useful methods of the Optional class.
Moreover, as happens for streams, an optional can’t be composed with its primitive counterpart, so, for example, if the method of listing 10.6 returned OptionalInt, you couldn’t pass it as a method reference to the flatMap method of another optional.
To demonstrate how the methods of the Optional class presented so far can be used together in a more compelling use case, suppose you have some Properties that are passed as configuration arguments to your program.
For the purpose of this example and to test the code you’ll develop, create some sample Properties as follows:
Now let’s also suppose your program needs to read a value from these Properties that it will interpret as a duration in seconds.
Because a duration has to be a positive number, you’ll want a method with the following signature.
To clarify this requirement you can formalize it with a few JUnit assertions:
Let’s try to implement the method satisfying this requirement in imperative style, as shown in the following listing.
As you might expect, the resulting implementation is quite convoluted and not very readable, presenting multiple nested conditions coded both as if statements and as a try/catch block.
Take a few minutes to figure out in Quiz 10.3 how you can achieve the same result using what you’ve learned in this chapter.
Quiz 10.3: Reading duration from a property using an optional.
Because the value returned by the Properties.getProperty(String) method is a null when the required property doesn’t exist, it’s convenient to turn this value into an optional with the ofNullable factory method.
In this way, if any of these operations will return an empty optional, the method will return the 0 that’s passed as the default value to the orElse method; otherwise, it will return the positive integer contained in the optional.
Note the common style in using optionals and streams; both are reminiscent of a database query where several operations are chained together.
You can create Optional objects with the static factory methods Optional.empty, Optional.of, and.
The Optional class supports many methods such as map, flatMap, and filter, which are.
Using Optional forces you to actively unwrap an optional to deal with the absence of a value; as a.
Using Optional can help you design better APIs in which, just by reading the signature of a method,
In recent years, two trends are obliging us to rethink the way we write software.
The first trend is related to the hardware on which we run our applications, and the second trend concerns how applications are structured and particularly how they interact with each other.
We discussed the impact of the hardware trend in chapter 7
We noted that since the advent of multicore processors, the most effective way to speed up your applications is to write software that’s able to fully exploit the multicore processors.
You saw that this is possible by splitting large tasks and making each subtask run in parallel with the others; you also learned how the fork/join framework (available since Java 7) and parallel streams (new in Java 8) allow you to accomplish this in a simpler and more effective way than by directly working with threads.
The second trend reflects the increasing availability and use by applications of internet services accessible through public APIs, made available by known providers such as Google (for example, localization information), Facebook (for example, social information), and Twitter (for example, news)
Nowadays it’s relatively rare to develop a website or a network application that works in total isolation.
It’s far more likely that your next web application will be a mash-up: it will use content from multiple sources and aggregate it to ease the life of your end users.
For instance, you might like to provide the collective sentiment about a given topic to your French users; to do this you could ask the Facebook or Twitter API for the most trending comments about that topic in any language and maybe rank the most relevant ones with your internal algorithms.
Then you might use Google Translate to translate them into French, or even Google Maps to geolocate where their authors live, and finally aggregate all this information and display it on your website.
Oh, and of course, if any of these external network services are slow to respond, then you’ll wish to provide partial results to your users, for example, showing your text results alongside a generic map with a question mark in it, instead of showing a totally blank screen until the map server responds or times out.
Figure 11.1 illustrates how this typical mash-up application interacts with the remote services it needs to work with.
To implement a similar application, you’ll have to contact multiple web services across the internet.
But what you don’t want to do is block your computations and waste billions of precious clock cycles of your CPU waiting for an answer from these services.
For example, you shouldn’t have to wait for data from Facebook to start processing the data coming from Twitter.
This situation represents the other side of the multitask-programming coin.
The fork/join framework and parallel streams discussed in chapter 7 are valuable tools for parallelism; they split an operation into multiple suboperations and perform those suboperations in parallel on different cores, CPUs, or even machines.
Conversely, when dealing with concurrency instead of parallelism, or when your main goal is to perform several loosely related tasks on the same CPUs, keeping their cores as busy as possible to maximize the throughput of your application, what you really want to achieve is to avoid blocking a thread and wasting its computational resources while waiting, potentially for quite a while, for a result from a remote service or from interrogating a database.
As you’ll see in this chapter, the Future interface and particularly its new CompletableFuture implementation are your best tools in such circumstances.
The Future interface was introduced in Java 5 to model a result made available at some point in the future.
It models an asynchronous computation and provides a reference to its result that will be available when the computation itself is completed.
Triggering a potentially time-consuming action inside a Future allows the caller Thread to continue doing useful work instead of just waiting for the operation’s result.
You can think of it as taking a bag of clothes to your favorite dry cleaner.
They will give you a receipt to tell you when your clothes are cleaned (a Future)
Another advantage of Future is that it’s friendlier to work with than lower-level Threads.
To work with a Future, you typically have to wrap the time-consuming operation inside a Callable object and submit it to an Executor-Service.
The following listing shows an example written before Java 8
As depicted in figure 11.3, this style of programming allows your thread to perform some other tasks while the long-lasting operation is executed concurrently in a separate thread provided by the ExecutorService.
Then, when you can’t do any other meaningful work without having the result of that asynchronous operation, you can retrieve it from the Future by invoking its get method.
This method immediately returns the result of the operation if it’s already completed or blocks your thread, waiting for its result to be available.
This first small example shows that the Future interface provides methods to check if the asynchronous computation is complete (using the isDone method), to wait for its completion, and to retrieve its result.
But these features aren’t enough to let you write concise concurrent code.
For example, it’s difficult to express dependencies between results of a Future; declaratively it’s easy to say, “When the result of the long computation is available, please send its result to another long computation, and when that’s done, combine its result with the result.
This is why more declarative features would be useful, such as these:
Combining two asynchronous computations in one—both when they’re independent and when the second depends on the result of the first.
Waiting for the completion of all tasks performed by a set of Futures  Waiting for the completion of only the quickest task in a set of Futures (possibly because they’re.
In this chapter, you’ll learn how the new CompletableFuture class (which implements the Future interface) makes all of this possible in a declarative way using Java 8’s new features.
The designs of Stream and CompletableFuture follow similar patterns: both use lambda expressions and the idea of pipelining.
For this reason you could say that CompletableFuture is to a plain Future what Stream is to a Collection.
To demonstrate the CompletableFuture features, we incrementally develop a best-price-finder application that contacts multiple online shops to find the lowest price for a given product or service.
First, you’ll learn how to provide an asynchronous API for your customers (useful if you’re the owner of one of the online shops)
Second, you’ll learn how to make your code non-blocking when you’re a consumer of a synchronous API.
You’ll discover how to pipeline two subsequent asynchronous operations, merging them into a single asynchronous computation.
This situation would arise, for example, when the online shop returns a discount code along with the original price of the item you wanted to buy—so you have to contact a second remote discount service to find out the percentage discount associated with this discount code before finally calculating the actual price of that item.
You’ll also learn how to reactively process events representing the completion of an asynchronous operation and how that allows the best-price-finder application to constantly update the best-buy quote for the item you want to buy as each shop returns its price, instead of having to wait for all the shops to return their respective quotes (which also risks giving the user a blank screen forever if one of the shops’ servers is down)
The phrase synchronous API is just another way of talking about a traditional call to a method: you call it, the caller then waits while the method computes, the method then returns, and the caller continues with the returned value.
Even if the caller and callee were executed on different threads, the caller would still wait for the callee to complete; this gives rise to the phrase blocking call.
In contrast, in an asynchronous API the method returns immediately, or at least before its computation is complete, delegating its remaining computation to a thread, which runs asynchronously to the caller—hence the phrase non-blocking call.
This style of computation is common for I/O systems programming: you initiate a disc access, which happens asynchronously while you do more computation, and when you have nothing more useful to do, you simply wait until the disc blocks are loaded into memory.
To start implementing the best-price-finder application, let’s begin by defining the API that each single shop should provide.
First, a shop declares a method that returns the price of a product given its name:
The internal implementation of this method would query the shop’s database but probably also perform other time-consuming tasks, such as contacting various other external services (for example, the shop’s suppliers or manufacturer-related promotional discounts)
To fake such a long-running method execution, in the rest of this chapter we simply use a delay method, which introduces an artificial delay of 1 second, defined in the following listing.
For the purpose of this chapter, the getPrice method can be modeled by calling delay and then returning a randomly calculated value for the price, as shown in the next listing.
The code for returning a randomly calculated price may look like a bit of a hack.
It randomizes the price based on the product name by using the result of charAt as a number.
This implies that when the consumer of this API (in this case, the best-price-finder application) invokes this method, it will remain blocked and then idle for 1 second while waiting for its synchronous completion.
This is unacceptable, especially considering that the best-price-finder application will have to repeat this operation for all the shops in its network.
In the subsequent sections of this chapter, you’ll discover how you can resolve this problem by consuming this synchronous API in an asynchronous way.
But for the purpose of learning how to design an asynchronous API, we continue this section by pretending to be on the other side of the barricade: you’re a wise shop owner who realizes how painful this synchronous API is for its users and you want to rewrite it as an asynchronous API to make your customers’ lives easier.
To achieve this you first have to turn the getPrice method into a getPriceAsync method and change its return value:
As we mentioned in the introduction of this chapter, the java.util.concurrent .Future interface was introduced in Java 5 to represent the result of an asynchronous computation (that is, the caller thread is allowed to proceed without blocking)
This means a Future is just a handle for a value that isn’t yet available but can be retrieved by invoking its get method after its computation has finally terminated.
As a result, the getPriceAsync method can return immediately, giving the caller thread a chance to perform other useful computations in the meantime.
The new CompletableFuture class gives you various possibilities to implement this method in an easy way, for example, as shown in the next listing.
Here you create an instance of CompletableFuture, representing an asynchronous computation and containing a result when it becomes available.
Then you fork a different Thread that will perform the actual price calculation and return the Future instance without waiting for that long-lasting calculation to terminate.
When the price of the requested product is finally available, you can complete the Completable-Future using its complete method to set the value.
Obviously this feature also explains the name of this new Future implementation.
A client of this API can invoke it, as shown in the next listing.
As you can see, the client asks the shop to get the price of a certain product.
Because the shop provides an asynchronous API, this invocation almost immediately returns the Future, through which the client can retrieve the product’s price at a later time.
This allows the client to do other tasks, like querying other shops, instead of remaining blocked waiting for the first shop to produce the requested result.
Later, when there are no other meaningful jobs that the client could do without having the product price, it can invoke get on the Future.
By doing so the client either unwraps the value contained in the Future (if the asynchronous task is already finished) or remains blocked until that value is available.
The output produced by the code in listing 11.5 could be something like this:
You can see that the invocation of the getPriceAsync method returns far sooner than when the price calculation eventually finishes.
In section 11.4 you’ll learn that it’s also possible for the client to avoid any risk of being blocked.
Instead it can just be notified when the Future is completed, and execute a callback code, defined through a lambda expression or a method reference, only when the result of the computation is available.
For now we’ll address another problem: how to correctly manage the possibility of an error occurring during the execution of the asynchronous task.
The code we developed so far works correctly if everything goes smoothly.
But what happens if the price calculation generates an error? Unfortunately, in this case you’ll get a particularly negative outcome: the exception raised to signal the error will remain confined in the thread, which is trying to calculate the product price, and will ultimately kill it.
As a consequence, the client will remain blocked forever, waiting for the result of the get method to arrive.
The client can prevent this problem by using an overloaded version of the get method that also accepts a timeout.
It’s a good practice to always use a timeout to avoid similar situations elsewhere in your code.
This way the client will at least avoid waiting indefinitely, but when the timeout expires, it will just be notified with a TimeoutException.
As a consequence, it won’t have a chance to discover what really caused that failure inside the thread that was trying to calculate the product price.
To make the client aware of the reason the shop wasn’t able to provide the price of the requested product, you have to propagate the Exception that caused the problem inside the CompletableFuture through its completeExceptionally method.
This refines listing 11.4 to give the code shown in the listing that follows.
The client will now be notified with an ExecutionException (which takes an Exception parameter containing the cause—the original Exception thrown by the price calculation method)
Until now you’ve created CompletableFutures and completed them programmatically, when it seemed convenient to do so, but the CompletableFuture class itself comes with lots of handy factory methods that can make this process far easier and less verbose.
For example, the supplyAsync method can let you rewrite the getPriceAsync method in listing 11.4 with a single statement, as shown in the following listing.
The supplyAsync method accepts a Supplier as argument and returns a Completable-Future that will be asynchronously completed with the value obtained by invoking that Supplier.
This Supplier will be run by one of the Executors in the ForkJoinPool, but you can specify a different Executor by passing it as a second argument to the overloaded version of this method.
More generally, it’s possible to optionally pass an Executor to all other CompletableFuture factory methods, and you’ll use this capability in section 11.3.4, where we demonstrate that using an Executor that fits the characteristics of your application can have a positive effect on its performance.
For the rest of this chapter, we’ll suppose you sadly have no control over the API implemented by the Shop class and that it provides only synchronous blocking methods.
This is also what typically happens when you want to consume an HTTP API provided by some service.
You’ll learn how it’s still possible to query multiple shops asynchronously, thus avoiding becoming.
So you’ve been asked to develop a best-price-finder application, and all the shops you have to query provide only the same synchronous API implemented as shown at the beginning of section 11.2
In other words, you have a list of shops, like this one:
You have to implement a method with the following signature, that given the name of a product returns a List of strings, where each string contains the name of a shop and the price of the requested product in that shop:
You may be tempted to write something like what’s shown in the next listing (yes, it’s good if you’re already thinking this first solution is bad!)
Now try to put the method findPrices to work with the only product you want madly these days (yes, you guessed it; it’s the myPhone27S)
In addition, record how long the method takes to run, as shown in the following listing; this will let you compare its performance with the improved method we develop later.
After reading chapter 7, the first and quickest improvement that should occur to you would be to avoid this sequential computation using a parallel Stream instead of a sequential, as shown in the next listing.
Find out if this new version of findPrices is any better by again running the code in listing 11.9:
Well done! It looks like this was a simple but very effective idea: now the four different shops are queried in parallel, so it takes in total just a bit more than a second to complete.
Can you do even better? Let’s try to turn all the synchronous invocations to the different shops in the findPrices method into asynchronous invocations, using what you learned so far about CompletableFutures.
You saw that you can use the factory method supplyAsync to create Completable-Future objects.
Using this approach, you obtain a List<CompletableFuture<String>>, where each CompletableFuture in the List will contain the String name of a shop when its computation is completed.
But because the findPrices method you’re trying to reimplement using CompletableFutures has to return just a List<String>, you’ll have to wait for the completion of all these futures and extract the value they contain before returning the List.
To achieve this result, you can apply a second map operation to the original List<CompletableFuture<String>>, invoking a join on all the futures in the List and then waiting for their completion one by one.
Note that the join method of the CompletableFuture class has the same meaning as the get method also declared in the Future interface, with the only difference being that join doesn’t throw any checked exception.
By using it you don’t have to bloat the lambda expression passed to this second map with a try/catch block.
Putting everything together, you can rewrite the findPrices method as follows.
Note that you use two separate stream pipelines, instead of putting the two map operations one after the other in the same stream-processing pipeline—and for a very good reason.
Given the lazy nature of intermediate stream operations, if you had processed the stream in a single pipeline, you would have succeeded only in executing all the requests to different shops synchronously and sequentially.
This is because the creation of each CompletableFuture to interrogate a given shop would start only when the computation of the previous one had completed, letting the join method return the result of that computation.
Why Stream's laziness causes a sequential computation and how to avoid it.
The top half of figure 11.4 shows that processing the stream with a single pipeline implies the evaluation order (identified by the dotted line) is sequential.
In fact, a new CompletableFuture is created only after the former one has been completely evaluated.
Conversely, the bottom half of the figure demonstrates how gathering the CompletableFutures in a list first, represented by the oval, allows all of them to start before waiting for their completion.
Running the code in listing 11.11 to check the performance of this third version of the findPrices method, you could obtain output along the lines of this:
But it’s also almost twice as slow as the previous implementation using a.
Moreover, it’s even more disappointing considering you obtained the parallel stream version with a trivial change to the sequential version.
If you’re using a machine capable of running more threads in parallel (for example, eight), then it will require more shops and processes in parallel to reproduce the behavior shown in these pages.
The parallel stream version performs so well only because it can run four tasks in parallel, so it’s able to allocate exactly one thread for each shop.
Unfortunately, the parallel stream version will also now require a whole second more than before, because all four threads it can run in parallel (available in the common thread pool) are now busy with the first four shops.
The fifth query will have to wait for the completion of one of the former operations to free up a thread, as shown here:
What about the CompletableFuture version? Let’s also give it a try with the additional fifth shop:
The CompletableFuture version seems just a bit faster than the one using parallel stream.
They look equivalent and for a very good reason: they both internally use the same common pool that by default has a fixed number of threads equal to the CompletableFutures have an advantage because, in contrast to what’s offered by the parallel Streams API, they allow you to specify a different Executor to submit their tasks to.
This allows you to configure this Executor, and in particular to size its thread pool, in a way that better fits the requirements of your application.
Let’s see if you can translate this better level of configurability into practical performance gain for your application.
In this case, a sensible choice seems to be to create an Executor with a number of threads in its pool that takes into account the actual workload you could expect in your application, but how do you correctly size it?
In the great book Java Concurrency in Practice (http://mng.bz/979c), Brian Goetz and coauthors give some advice to find the optimal size for a thread pool.
This is important because if the number of threads in the pool is too big, they’ll end up competing for scarce CPU and memory resources, wasting their time performing context switching.
Conversely, if this number is too small (as it very likely is in your application), some of the cores of the CPU will remain underutilized.
In particular, Goetz suggests that the right pool size to approximate a desired CPU utilization rate can be calculated with the following formula:
In practice it will be wasteful to have more threads than shops, because in doing so you’ll have threads in your pool that are never used.
For this reason, you need to set up an Executor with a fixed number of threads equal to the number of shops you have to query, so there will be exactly one thread for each shop.
But you must also set an upper limit of 100 threads in order to avoid a server crash for a larger number of shops, as shown in the following listing.
Note that you’re creating a pool made of daemon threads.
A Java program can’t terminate or exit while a normal thread is executing, so a leftover thread waiting for a never-satisfiable event causes problems.
By contrast, marking a thread as a daemon means it can be killed on program termination.
You can now pass the new Executor as the second argument of the supplyAsync factory method.
For example, you should now create the CompletableFuture retrieving the price of the requested product from a given shop as follows:
In general this trend carries on until the number of shops reaches that threshold of 400 we calculated earlier.
This demonstrates that it was a good idea to create an Executor that better fits the characteristics of your application and to make use of CompletableFutures to submit their tasks to it.
This is almost always an effective strategy and something to consider when making intensive use of asynchronous operations.
You’ve now seen two different ways to do parallel computing on a collection: either convert it to a parallel stream and use operations like map on it, or iterate over the collection and spawn operations within a CompletableFuture.
The latter provides more control using resizing of thread pools, which helps ensure that your overall computation doesn’t block just because all of your fixed number of threads are waiting for I/O.
If you’re doing computation-heavy operations with no I/O, then the Stream interface gives the simplest implementation and one likely to be the most efficient (if all threads are compute-bound, then there’s no point in having more threads than processor cores)
On the other hand, if your parallel units of work involve waiting for I/O (including network connections), then CompletableFutures give more flexibility and the ability to match the number of threads to the wait/computer, or W/C, ratio as discussed previously.
Another reason to avoid using parallel streams when I/O waits are involved in the stream-processing pipeline is that the laziness of streams can make it harder to reason about when the waits actually happen.
You’ve learned how to take advantage of CompletableFutures both to provide an asynchronous API to your clients and as the client of a synchronous but slow server.
But we performed only a single time-consuming operation in each Future.
In the next section, you’ll see how you can use CompletableFutures to pipeline multiple asynchronous operations, in a declarative style similar to what you’ve already learned using the Streams API.
Let’s now suppose that all the shops have agreed to use a centralized discount service.
This service uses five different discount codes, and each code has a different discount percentage.
You represent this idea by defining a Discount.Code enumeration, as shown in the following listing.
Also suppose the shops have agreed to change the format of the result of the getPrice method.
Our sample implementation will return a random Discount.Code together with the random price already calculated:
Your best-price-finder application should now obtain the prices from the different shops, parse the resulting Strings, and for each String, query the discount server’s needs.
This process determines the final discounted price of the requested product (the actual discount percentage associated with each discount code could change, so this is why you query the server each time)
We’ve encapsulated the parsing of the Strings produced by the shop in the following Quote class:
You can obtain an instance of the Quote class, which contains the name of the shop, the nondiscounted price, and the discount code, by simply passing the String produced by a shop to the static parse factory method.
The Discount service will also have an applyDiscount method accepting a Quote object and returning a String stating the discounted price for the shop that produced that quote, as shown in the next listing.
Because the Discount service is a remote service, you again add a simulated delay of 1 second to it, as shown in the following listing.
As you did in section 11.3, first try to reimplement the findPrices method to fit these new requirements in the most obvious (but sadly sequential and synchronous) way.
The desired result is obtained by pipelining three map operations on the stream of shops:
The first operation transforms each shop into a String that encodes the price and discount code of the requested product for that shop.
The second operation parses those Strings, converting each of them in aQuote object.
Finally, the third one contacts the remote Discount service that will calculate the final discounted.
As you may imagine, the performance of this implementation will be far from optimal, but try to measure it, as usual, by running your benchmark:
You already know you can easily improve this result by converting the stream into a parallel one.
However, you also learned in section 11.3 that this solution doesn’t scale very well when you increase the number of shops to be queried, due to the fixed common thread pool that streams rely on.
Conversely, you learned that you could better utilize your CPU by defining a custom Executor that will schedule the tasks performed by the CompletableFutures.
Let’s try to reimplement the findPrices method asynchronously, again using the features provided by CompletableFuture.
Don’t worry if there’s something that looks unfamiliar; we explain it shortly.
Things look a bit more complex this time, so try to understand what’s going on here, step by step.
The sequence of these three transformations is depicted in figure 11.5
You’re performing the same three map operations as you did in the synchronous solution of listing 11.15, but you make those operations asynchronous when necessary, using the feature provided by the CompletableFuture class.
You’ve already seen the first of these three operations in various examples in this chapter; you just query the shop asynchronously by passing a lambda expression to the supplyAsync factory method.
The result of this first transformation is a Stream<Completable-Future<String>>, where each CompletableFuture will contain, once completed, the String returned by the corresponding shop.
Note that you configure the CompletableFutures with the custom Executor developed in listing 11.12
Now you have to convert those Strings into Quotes with a second transformation.
But because this parsing operation isn’t invoking any remote service or doing any I/O in general, it can be performed almost instantaneously and can be done synchronously without introducing any delay.
For this reason, you implement this second transformation by invoking the thenApply method on the CompletableFutures produced by the first step and passing to it a Function converting a String into an instance of Quote.
Note that using the thenApply method doesn’t block your code until the Completable-Future on which you’re invoking it is completed.
You can see this as building a recipe of what to do with the result of the CompletableFuture, just like when you were working with a stream pipeline.
The third map operation involves contacting the remote Discount service to apply the appropriate discount percentage to the nondiscounted prices received from the shops.
This transformation is different from the previous one because it will have to be executed remotely (or, in this case, it will have to simulate the remote invocation with a delay), and for this reason you also want to perform it asynchronously.
To achieve this, as you did with the first invocation of supplyAsync with getPrice, you pass this operation as a lambda expression to the supplyAsync factory method, which will return another CompletableFuture.
At this point you have two asynchronous operations, modeled with two distinct CompletableFutures, that you want to perform in a cascade:
Retrieve the price from a shop and then transform it into aQuote  Take this Quote and pass it to theDiscount service to obtain the final discounted price.
The Java 8 CompletableFutures API provides the thenCompose method specifically for this purpose, allowing you to pipeline two asynchronous operations, passing the result of the first operation to the second operation when it becomes available.
In other words, you can compose two CompletableFutures by invoking the thenCompose method on the first CompletableFuture and passing to it a Function.
This Function has as argument the value returned by that first CompletableFuture when it completes, and it returns a second CompletableFuture that uses the.
Note that with this approach, while the Futures are retrieving the quotes from the different shops, the main thread can perform other useful operations such as responding to UI events.
This new version of the findPrices method implemented in listing 11.8 might produce output like this:
The thenCompose method you used in listing 11.16, like other methods of the Completable-Future class, also has a variant with an Async suffix, thenComposeAsync.
In general, a method without the Async suffix in its name executes its task in the same thread as the previous task, whereas a method terminating with Async always submits the succeeding task to the thread pool, so each of the tasks can be handled by a different thread.
In this case, the result of the second CompletableFuture depends on the first, so it makes no difference to the final result or to its broad-brush timing whether you compose the two CompletableFutures with one or the other variant of this method.
We chose to use the one with thenCompose only because it’s slightly more efficient due to less thread-switching overhead.
In listing 11.16, you invoked the thenCompose method on one CompletableFuture and passed to it a second CompletableFuture, which needed as input the value resulting from the execution of the first.
But another frequently occurring case is where you need to combine the results of the operations performed by two completely independent CompletableFutures, and you don’t want to wait for the first to complete before starting on the second.
In situations like this, use the thenCombine method; this takes as second argument a BiFunction, which defines how the results of the two CompletableFutures are to be combined when they both become available.
Just like thenCompose, the thenCombine method also comes with an Async variant.
In this case, using the thenCombineAsync method will cause the combination operation defined by the BiFunction to be submitted to the thread pool and then executed asynchronously in a separate task.
After both have completed, you can combine the results by multiplying the price by the exchange rate.
With this approach, you’ll obtain a third CompletableFuture that will complete when the results of the two CompletableFutures are both available and have been combined using the BiFunction, as done in the following listing.
Here, because the combination operation is a simple multiplication, performing it in a separate task would have been a waste of resources, so you need to use the then-Combine method instead of its asynchronous thenCombineAsync counterpart.
CompletableFutures use lambda expressions to provide a declarative API that offers the possibility of easily defining a recipe that combines and composes different synchronous and asynchronous tasks to perform a complex operation in the most effective way.
In listing 11.18, you create a first Future, submitting a Callable to an Executor querying an external service to find the exchange rate between EUR and USD.
Then you create a second Future, retrieving the price in EUR of the requested product for a given shop.
Finally, as you did in listing 11.17, you multiply the exchange rate by the price in the same future that also queried the shop to retrieve the price in EUR.
The difference between these two implementations might seem small, but this is because you’re just combining two Futures.
You’re almost finished with your best-price-finder application, but there’s still one ingredient missing.
You’d like to show your users the prices provided by the different shops as soon as they become available (car insurance or flight-comparison websites typically do this), instead of waiting for all the price requests to complete, as you did until now.
In the next section, you’ll discover how to achieve this by reacting to the completion of a CompletableFuture instead of invoking get or join on it and thereby remaining blocked until the CompletableFuture itself completes.
In all the code examples you’ve seen in this chapter, you simulated methods doing remote invocations with a 1-second delay in their response.
Nevertheless, in a real-world scenario, the various remote services you need to contact from your application are likely to have unpredictable delays, caused by everything from server load to network delays, and perhaps.
For these reasons it’s likely the prices of the products you want to buy will be available for some shops far earlier than for others.
A method to simulate a random delay between 0.5 and.
Until now, you’ve implemented the findPrices method so it shows the prices provided by the different shops only when all of them are available.
What you want to do now is have the best-price-finder application display the price for a given shop as soon as it becomes available, without waiting for the slowest one (which perhaps even times out)
The first thing to avoid is waiting for the creation of a List already containing all the prices.
You’ll need to work directly with the stream of CompletableFutures, where each CompletableFuture is executing the sequence of operations necessary for a given shop.
To do this, in the next listing you’ll refactor the first part of the implementation from listing 11.12 into a findPricesStream method to produce this stream of CompletableFutures.
Refactoring the findPrices method to return a stream of Futures.
At this point, you add a fourth map operation on the Stream returned by the findPricesStream method to the three already performed inside that method.
This new operation simply registers an action on each CompletableFuture; this action consumes the value of the CompletableFuture as soon as it completes.
The Java 8 CompletableFuture API provides this feature via the thenAccept method, which take as argument a Consumer of the value with which it completes.
In this case, this value is the String returned by the discount services and containing the name of a shop together with the discounted price of the requested product for that shop, and the only action you want to perform to consume this value is to print it:
Note that, as you’ve already seen for the thenCompose and thenCombine methods, the thenAccept method also has an Async variant named thenAcceptAsync.
The Async variant schedules the execution of the Consumer passed to it on a new thread from the thread pool instead of directly performing it using the same thread that completed the CompletableFuture.
Because you want to avoid an unnecessary context switch, and more importantly you want to react to the completion of the CompletableFuture as soon as possible (instead of risking having to wait for a new thread to be available), you don’t use this variant here.
Because the thenAccept method already specifies how to consume the result produced by the CompletableFuture when it becomes available, it returns a Completable-Future<Void>
As a result, the map operation will return a Stream-<Completable-Future<Void>>
There’s not much you can do on a Completable-Future<Void> except wait for its completion, but this is exactly what you need.
You also want to give the slowest shop a chance to provide its response and print.
To do this, you can put all the CompletableFuture<Void>s of the stream into an array and then wait for the completion of all of them, as in the following listing.
The allOf factory method takes as input an array of CompletableFutures and returns a CompletableFuture<Void> that’s completed only when all the CompletableFutures passed have completed.
This means that invoking join on the CompletableFuture returned by the allOf method provides an easy way to wait for the completion of all the CompletableFutures in the original stream.
Conversely, in other applications you may wish to wait for the completion of only one of the CompletableFutures in an array, perhaps if you’re consulting two currency-exchange servers and are happy to take the result of the first to respond.
In this case, you can similarly use the anyOf factory method.
As a matter of detail, this method takes as input an array of CompletableFutures and returns a Completable-Future<Object> that completes with the same value as the first-to-complete CompletableFuture.
Running the code in listing 11.21 with this change, you’ll see that the prices provided by the different shops don’t appear all at the same time as happened before but are printed incrementally as soon as the discounted price for a given shop is available.
To make the result of this change more obvious, we slightly modified the code to report a timestamp showing the time taken for each price to be calculated:
You can see that, due to the effect of the random delays, the first price is now printed more than twice as fast as the last!
Executing relatively long-lasting operations using asynchronous tasks can increase the performance and responsiveness of your application, especially if it relies on one or more remote external services.
You should consider providing an asynchronous API to your clients.
A CompletableFuture also allows you to propagate and manage errors generated within an asynchronous task.
You can asynchronously consume from a synchronous API by simply wrapping its invocation in a CompletableFuture.
You can compose or combine multiple asynchronous tasks both when they’re independent and when the result of one of them is used as the input to another.
You can register a callback on a CompletableFuture to reactively execute some code when the Future completes and its result becomes available.
You can determine when all values in a list of CompletableFutures have completed, or alternatively you can wait for just the first to complete.
The Java API includes many useful components to help you build complex applications.
We believe the majority of experienced Java developers will agree that date and time support before Java 8 was far from ideal.
Don’t worry, though; Java 8 introduces a brand new Date and Time API to tackle this issue.
In Java 1.0 the only support for date and time was the java.util.Date class.
Despite its name, this class doesn’t represent a date but a point in time with milliseconds precision.
Not very intuitive, is it? Moreover even the String returned by the toString method of the Date class could be quite misleading.
It also includes the JVM’s default time zone, CET, which is Central Europe Time in our case.
But this doesn’t mean the Date class itself is in any way aware of the time zone!
The problems and limitations of the Date class were immediately clear when Java 1.0 came out, but it was also clear that it wasn’t fixable without breaking its backward compatibility.
As a consequence, in Java 1.1 many of the Date class’s methods were deprecated, and it was replaced with the alternative java.util.Calendar class.
Unfortunately, Calendar has similar problems and design flaws that lead to error-prone code.
For instance, months also start at index 0 (at least.
Calendar got rid of the 1900 offset for the year)
Even worse, the presence of both the Date and Calendar classes increases confusion among developers.
Which one should you use? In addition, some other features such as the DateFormat, used to format and parse dates or time in a language-independent manner, work only with the Date class.
The DateFormat also comes with its own set of problems.
This means that if two threads try to parse a date using the same formatter at the same time, you may receive unpredictable results.
The consequence is that all these flaws and inconsistencies have encouraged the use of third-party date and time libraries, such as Joda-Time.
For these reasons Oracle decided to provide high-quality date and time support in the native Java API.
As a result, Java 8 integrates many of the Joda-Time features in the java.time package.
In this chapter, we explore the features introduced by the new Date and Time API.
We start with basic use cases such as creating dates and times that are suitable to be used by both humans and machines, and gradually explore more advanced applications of the new Date and Time API, like manipulating, parsing, and printing date-time objects and working with different time zones and alternative calendars.
Let’s start by exploring how to create simple dates and intervals.
The class LocalDate is probably the first one you’ll come across when you start using the new Date and Time API.
An instance of this class is an immutable object representing just a plain date without the time of day.
In particular, it doesn’t carry any information about the time zone.
You can create a LocalDate instance using the of static factory method.
A LocalDate instance provides many methods to read its most commonly used values such as year, month, day of the week, and so on, as shown in the listing that follows.
It’s also possible to obtains the current date from the system clock using the now factory method:
All the other date-time classes we’ll investigate in the remaining part of this chapter provide a similar factory method.
You can also access the same information by passing a TemporalField to the get method.
The TemporalField is an interface defining how to access the value of a specific field of a temporal object.
The ChronoField enumeration implements this interface, so you can conveniently use an element of that enumeration with the get method, as shown in the next listing.
Similarly, the time of day, such as 13:45:20, is represented by the LocalTime class.
You can create instances of LocalTime using two overloaded static factory methods named of.
The first one accepts an hour and a minute and the second one also accepts a second.
Just like the LocalDate class, the LocalTime class provides some getter methods to access its values, as shown in the following listing.
Both LocalDate and LocalTime can be created by parsing a String representing them.
It’s possible to pass a DateTimeFormatter to the parse method.
An instance of this class specifies how to format a date and/or a time object.
It’s intended as a replacement for the old java.util.DateFormat that we mentioned earlier.
We show in more detail how you can use a DateTimeFormatter in section 12.2
Also note that these parse methods both throw a DateTimeParseException, which extends RuntimeException in case the String argument can’t be parsed as a valid LocalDate or LocalTime.
The composite class called LocalDateTime pairs a LocalDate and a LocalTime.
It represents both a date and a time, without a time zone, and can be created either directly or by combining a date and time, as shown in the next listing.
Creating a LocalDateTime directly or by combining a date and a time.
Note that it’s possible to create a LocalDateTime by passing a time to a LocalDate, or conversely a date to a LocalTime, using respectively their atTime or atDate methods.
You can also extract the LocalDate or LocalTime component from a LocalDateTime using the toLocalDate and toLocalTime methods:
As humans we’re used to thinking of dates and time in terms of weeks, days, hours, and minutes.
Nonetheless, this representation isn’t easy for a computer to deal with.
From a machine point of view, the most natural format to model time is with a single large number representing a point on a continuous timeline.
You can create an instance of this class by passing the number of seconds to its ofEpochSecond static factory method.
There’s a supplementary overloaded version of the ofEpochSecond static factory method that accepts a second argument that’s a nanosecond adjustment to the passed number of seconds.
This means all the following invocations of the ofEpochSecond factory method will return exactly the same Instant:
As you’ve already seen for the LocalDate and the other human-readable date-time classes, the Instant class also supports another static factory method named now, which allows you to capture a timestamp of the current moment.
It’s important to reinforce that an Instant is intended for use only by a machine.
As a consequence, it doesn’t provide any ability to handle units of time that are meaningful to humans.
But you can work with Instants by using the Duration and Period classes, which we look at next.
All the classes you’ve seen so far implement the Temporal interface, which defines how to read and manipulate the values of an object modeling a generic point in time.
We’ve shown you a few ways to create different Temporal instances.
The next natural step is to create a duration between two temporal objects.
The between static factory method of the Duration class serves exactly this purpose.
You can create a duration between two LocalTimes, two LocalDateTimes, or two Instants as follows:
Because LocalDateTime and Instant are made for different purposes, one to be used by humans and the other by machines, you’re not allowed to mix them.
If you try to create a duration between them, you’ll only obtain a DateTimeException.
Moreover, because the Duration class is used to represent an amount of time measured in seconds and eventually nanoseconds, you can’t pass a LocalDate to the between method.
When you need to model an amount of time in terms of years, months, and days, you can use the Period class.
You can find out the difference between two LocalDates with the between factory method of that class:
Finally, both the Duration and Period classes have other convenient factory methods to create instances of them directly, in other words, without defining them as the difference between two temporal objects, as shown in the next listing.
Both the Duration and Period classes share many similar methods, and table 12.1 lists these.
All the classes we’ve investigated so far are immutable, and this is a great design choice to allow a more functional programming style, ensure thread-safety, and preserve the consistency of the domain model.
Nevertheless, the new Date and Time API offers some handy methods to create a modified version of those objects.
For example, you may wish to add three days to an existing LocalDate instance.
We explore how to do this in the next section.
The most immediate and easiest way to create a modified version of an existing LocalDate is changing one of its attributes, using one of its withAttribute methods.
Note that all the methods return a new object with the modified attribute, as shown in the following listing.
Manipulating the attributes of a LocalDate in an absolute way.
You can also do this with the more generic with method, taking a TemporalField as first argument, as in the last statement of listing 12.6
This last with method is the dual of the get method used in listing 12.2
Both of these methods are declared in the Temporal interface implemented by all the classes of the Date and Time API, which define a single point in time such as LocalDate, LocalTime, LocalDateTime, and Instant.
More precisely, the get and with methods let you respectively read and modify the value of a field of a Temporal object.
It’s even possible to manipulate a LocalDate in a declarative manner.
For example, you can add or subtract a given amount of time, as shown in the next listing.
Manipulating the attributes of a LocalDate in a relative way.
Similarly to what we’ve explained about the with and get methods, the generic plus method used in the last statement of listing 12.7, together with the analogous minus method, is declared in.
These methods allow you to move a Temporal back or forward a given amount of time, defined by a number plus a Temporal-Unit, where the ChronoUnit enumeration offers a convenient implementation of the TemporalUnit interface.
As you may have anticipated, all the date-time classes representing a point in time like LocalDate, LocalTime, LocalDateTime, and Instant have many methods in common; table 12.2 summarizes these.
The common methods of date-time classes representing a point in time.
Check what you’ve learned up to now about manipulating dates with Quiz 12.1
What will the value of the date variable be after the following manipulations?
As you’ve seen, you can manipulate the date both in an absolute way and in a relative way.
You can also concatenate more manipulations in a single statement, because every change will create a new LocalDate object, and the subsequent invocation will manipulate the object created by the former one.
Finally, the last statement in this code snippet has no observable effect because, as usual, it creates a new LocalDate instance, but we’re not assigning this new value to any variable.
All the date manipulations you’ve seen so far are relatively straightforward.
Sometimes, you may need to perform more advanced operations, such as adjusting a date to the next Sunday, the next working day, or the last day of the month.
In such cases you can pass to an overloaded version of the with method a TemporalAdjuster that provides a more customizable way to define the manipulation needed to operate on a specific date.
The Date and Time API already provides many predefined Temporal-Adjusters for the most common use cases.
You can access them using the static factory methods contained in the TemporalAdjusters class, as shown next.
Table 12.3 provides a list of the TemporalAdjusters that can be created with these factory methods.
Creates a new date set to the first occurrence of the specified day of week after/before the date being adjusted unless it’s already on that day, in which case the same object is returned.
As you can see, TemporalAdjusters allow you to perform more complex date manipulations that still read like the problem statement.
Moreover, it’s relatively simple to create your own custom TemporalAdjuster implementation if you can’t find a predefined TemporalAdjuster that fits your.
In fact, the TemporalAdjuster interface declares only a single method (this makes it a functional interface), defined as follows.
This means an implementation of the TemporalAdjuster interface defines how to convert a Temporal object into another Temporal.
You can think of it as being like a UnaryOperator<Temporal>
Take a few minutes to practice what you’ve learned so far and implement your own TemporalAdjuster in Quiz 12.2
Develop a class named NextWorkingDay, implementing the TemporalAdjuster interface that moves a date forward by one day but skips Saturdays and Sundays.
This TemporalAdjuster normally moves a date forward one day, except if today is a Friday or Saturday, in which case it advances the dates three or two days, respectively.
Note that since a TemporalAdjuster is a functional interface, you could just pass the behavior of this adjuster in a lambda expression:
It’s likely that you may want to apply this manipulation to a date in several points of your code, and for this reason we suggest encapsulating its logic in a proper class as we did here.
Do the same for all the manipulations you use frequently.
You’ll end up with a small library of adjusters you and your team could easily reuse in your codebase.
If you want to define the TemporalAdjuster with a lambda expression, it’s preferable to do it using the ofDateAdjuster static factory of the TemporalAdjusters class that accepts a UnaryOperator<LocalDate> as follows:
Another common operation you may want to perform on your date and time objects is printing them in different formats specific to your business domain.
Similarly, you may want to convert Strings representing dates in those formats into actual date objects.
In the next section, we demonstrate the mechanisms provided by the new Date and Time API to accomplish these tasks.
Formatting and parsing is another relevant feature when working with dates and times.
The new java.time.format package is entirely devoted to this purpose.
All DateTimeFormatters can be used to create a String representing a given date or time in a specific format.
For example, here we produce a String using two different formatters:
You can also parse a String representing a date or a time in that format to re-create the date object itself.
You can achieve this by using the parse factory method provided by all the classes of the Date and Time API representing a point in time or an interval:
In comparison to the old java.util.DateFormat class, all the DateTimeFormatter instances are thread-safe.
Therefore, you can create singleton formatters, like the ones defined by the DateTimeFormatter constants, and share them among multiple threads.
DateTimeFormatter class also supports a static factory method that lets you create a formatter from a specific pattern, as shown in the next listing.
Here the LocalDate’s format method produces a String representing the date with the requested pattern.
Next, the static parse method re-creates the same date by parsing the generated String using the same formatter.
The ofPattern method also has an overloaded version allowing you to create a formatter for a given Locale, as shown in the following listing.
Finally, in case you need even more control, the DateTimeFormatterBuilder class lets you define complex formatters step by step using meaningful methods.
In addition, it provides you with the ability to have case-insensitive parsing, lenient parsing (allowing the parser to use heuristics to interpret inputs that don’t precisely match the specified format), padding, and optional sections of the formatter.
For example, you can programmatically build the same italianFormatter we used in listing 12.11 through the DateTimeFormatterBuilder as follows.
So far you’ve learned how to create, manipulate, format, and parse both points in time and intervals.
But you haven’t seen how to deal with subtleties involving dates and time.
For example, you may need to deal with different time zones or work with alternative calendar systems.
In the next sections, we explore these topics using the new Date and Time API.
None of the classes you’ve seen so far contained any information about time zones.
Dealing with time zones is another important issue that’s been vastly simplified by the new Date and Time API.
The new java.time.ZoneId class is the replacement for the old java.util.TimeZone class.
It aims to better shield you from the complexities related to time zones, such as dealing with Daylight Saving Time (DST)
Like the other classes of the Date and Time API, it’s immutable.
A time zone is a set of rules corresponding to a region in which the standard time is the same.
There are about 40 of them held in instances of the ZoneRules class.
You can simply call identified by a region ID, for example:
The region IDs are all in the format “{area}/{city}” and the set of available locations is the one supplied by the IANA Time Zone Database.
You can also convert an old TimeZone object to a ZoneId by using the new method toZoneId:
Once you have a ZoneId object, you can combine it with a LocalDate, a LocalDateTime, or an Instant, to transform it into ZonedDateTime instances, which represent points in time relative to the specified time zone, as shown in the next listing.
Figure 12.1 illustrates the components of a ZonedDateTime to help you understand the differences between LocaleDate, LocalTime, LocalDateTime, and ZoneId.
You can also convert a LocalDateTime to an Instant by using a ZoneId:
Another common way to express a time zone is with a fixed offset from UTC/Greenwich.
Be aware that a ZoneOffset defined in this way doesn’t have any Daylight Saving Time management, and for this reason it isn’t suggested in the majority of cases.
Because a ZoneOffset is also a ZoneId, you can use it as shown in listing 12.13
You can also create an OffsetDateTime, which represents a date-time with an offset from UTC/Greenwich in the ISO-8601 calendar system:
Another advanced feature supported by the new Date and Time API is support for non-ISO calendaring systems.
The ISO-8601 calendar system is the de facto world civil calendar system.
But four additional calendar systems are provided in Java 8
Each of these calendar systems has a dedicated date class: ThaiBuddhistDate, MinguoDate, JapaneseDate, and HijrahDate.
All these classes together with LocalDate implement the ChronoLocalDate interface intended to model a date in an arbitrary chronology.
You can create an instance of one of these classes out of a LocalDate.
More generally, you can create any other Temporal instance using their from static factory methods as follows:
Alternatively, you can explicitly create a calendar system for a specific Locale and create an instance of a date for that Locale.
In the new Date and Time API, the Chronology interface models a calendar system, and you can obtain an instance of it using its ofLocale static factory method:
The designers of the Date and Time API advise using LocalDate instead of Chrono-LocalDate for most cases; this is because a developer could make assumptions in their code that unfortunately aren’t true in a multicalendar system.
For these reasons, it’s recommended to use LocalDate throughout your application, including all storage, manipulation, and interpretation of business rules, whereas you should employ Chrono-LocalDate only when you need to localize the input or output of your program.
Out of the new calendars added to Java 8, the HijrahDate (Islamic calendar) seems to be the most complex because it can have variants.
There are a variety of methods to determine a new month, such as a new moon that could be visible anywhere in the world or that must be visible first in Saudi Arabia.
The withVariant method is used to choose the desired variant.
Java 8 has included the Umm Al-Qura variant for HijrahDate as standard.
The following code illustrates an example of displaying the start and end dates of Ramadan for the current Islamic year in ISO date:
The old java.util.Date class and all other classes used to model date and time in Java before Java 8 have many inconsistencies and design flaws, including their mutability and some poorly chosen offsets, defaults, and naming.
The date-time objects of the new Date and Time API are all immutable.
This new API provides two different time representations to manage the different needs of humans.
You can manipulate date and time objects in both an absolute and relative manner, and the result of.
TemporalAdjusters allow you to manipulate a date in a more complex way than just changing one of.
You can define a formatter to both print and parse date-time objects in a specific format.
You can represent a time zone, both relative to a specific region/location and as a fixed offset from.
UTC/Greenwich, and apply it to a date-time object in order to localize it.
You can use calendar systems different from the ISO-8601 standard system.
Chapter 14 covers more advanced functional programming techniques including higher-order functions, currying, persistent data structures, lazy lists, and pattern matching.
You can view this chapter as a mix of practical techniques to apply in your codebase as well as academic information that will make you a more knowledgeable programmer.
In addition, we speculate on what future enhancements and great new features may be in Java’s pipeline beyond Java 8
You’ve seen the term functional quite frequently throughout this book.
By now, you may have some ideas of what being functional entails.
We explain what functional programming is and introduce some of its terminology.
We first examine the concepts behind functional programming such as side effects, immutability, declarative programming, and referential transparency and relate these to Java 8
In the next chapter, we look more closely at functional programming techniques such as higher-order functions, currying, persistent data structures, lazy lists, pattern matching, and combinators.
Let’s start by imagining you’ve been asked to manage an upgrade to a large preexisting software system, which you haven’t yet seen.
What else might you wish the program to look like so it’s easy to work with? You’d want it to be well structured, with an understandable class hierarchy reflecting the structure of the system; there are even ways to estimate such structure by using software engineering metrics of coupling.
But for many programmers, the key day-to-day concern is debugging during maintenance: this code crashed because it observed some unexpected value.
Ultimately, the reason for the unexpected variable value problems just discussed is that shared mutable data structures are read and updated by more than one of the methods your maintenance centers on.
It would be a dream to maintain because you wouldn’t have any bad surprises about some object somewhere that unexpectedly modifies a data structure! A method, which modifies neither the state of its enclosing class nor the state of any other objects and returns its entire results using return, is called pure or side-effect free.
What constitutes a side effect more concretely? In a nutshell, a side effect is an action that’s not totally enclosed within the function itself.
Modifying a data structure in place, including assigning to any field, apart from initialization inside a constructor (for example, setter methods)
Throwing an exception  Doing I/O operations such as writing to a file.
Another way to look at this idea of no side effects is to consider immutable objects.
An immutable object is an object that can’t change its state after it’s instantiated so it can’t be affected by the actions of a function.
This means that once immutable objects are instantiated, they can never go into an unexpected state.
You can share them without having to copy them, and they’re thread-safe because they can’t be modified.
The idea of no side effects might appear as a pretty severe restriction, and you may doubt whether real systems can be built in this way.
We hope to convince you of this by the end of the chapter.
The good news is that components of systems that embrace this idea can use multicore parallelism without using locking, because the methods can no longer interfere with each other.
In addition, this is great for immediately understanding which parts of the program are independent.
These ideas come from functional programming, which we turn to in the next section.
But first, let’s explore the idea of declarative programming, upon which functional programming is based.
There are two ways of thinking about implementing a system by writing a program.
One way centers on how things are done: “first do this, then update that, then ....” For example, if you want to calculate the most expensive transaction in a list, you’ll typically execute a sequence of commands: take a transaction from the list and compare it with the provisional most expensive transaction; if it’s more expensive, then it becomes the provisional most expensive; repeat with the next transaction in the list and so on.
This “how” style of programming is an excellent match for classic object-oriented programming, sometimes called imperative programming, because it has instructions that mimic the low-level vocabulary of a computer (for example, assignment, conditional branching, and loops), as shown in this code:
The other way centers instead on what’s to be done.
The fine detail of how this query is implemented is left to the library.
The great advantage is that your query reads like the problem statement, and because of that it’s clear to understand immediately in comparison to trying to understand what a sequence of commands does.
You give rules saying what you want, and you expect the system to decide how to achieve it.
It’s great because it reads closer to the problem statement.
As we discussed, these two ideas can help you implement and maintain systems more easily.
Note that certain language features such as composing operations and passing behaviors, which we presented in chapter 3 using lambda expressions, are required to help read and write code in.
Using streams, you were able to chain several operations together to express a complicated query.
These features are what characterize functional programming languages; we look at them more carefully under the guise of combinators in the next chapter, in section 14.5
To make things tangible and connect them with the new features in Java 8, we now concretely define the idea of functional programming and its representation in Java.
What we’d like to impart is that by using functional-programming style, you can write serious programs without relying on side effects.
But in the context of functional programming a function corresponds to a mathematical function: it takes zero or more arguments, gives one or more results, and has no side effects.
You can see it as a black box, which takes some inputs and produces some outputs, as illustrated in figure 13.3
The distinction between this sort of function and the methods you see in programming languages like Java is central.
The idea of the mathematical functions like log or sin having such side effects in unthinkable.) In particular, mathematical functions when repeatedly called with the same arguments always return the same results.
This rules out methods such as Random.nextInt, and we further discuss this idea later under the concept of referential transparency.
When we wish to emphasize the difference, we refer to the first as pure functional programming (we return to this later in the chapter) and the latter as functional-style programming.
In practice, you can’t completely program in pure functional style in Java.
For example, Java’s I/O model consists of side-effecting methods (calling Scanner.nextLine has the side effect of consuming a line from a file, so calling it twice typically gives different results)
Nonetheless, it’s possible to write core components of your system as if they were purely functional.
First, there’s a further subtlety about no one seeing your side effects and hence the meaning of functional.
Suppose a function or method has no side effects, except for it incrementing a field just after entry and decrementing it just before exit.
From the point of view of a program consisting of a single thread, this method has no visible side effects and can be regarded as functional style.
You could hide this issue by wrapping the body of this method with a lock, and this would again enable you to argue that the method is functional.
But in doing so you would have lost the ability to execute two calls to the method in parallel using two cores on your multicore processor.
Our guideline is that to be regarded as functional style, a function or method can mutate only local variables.
By this we mean all fields are final, and all fields of reference type refer transitively to other immutable objects.
Later you may also permit updates to fields of objects that are freshly created in the method, and so aren’t visible from elsewhere, and that aren’t saved to affect the result of a subsequent call.
Our previous guideline is incomplete, and there’s an additional requirement on being functional, which feels less important at first.
To be regarded as functional style, a function or method shouldn’t throw any exceptions.
There’s a simple overlegalistic explanation: you can’t throw an exception because this means a result is being signaled other than being passed as a proper result via return as in the black-box model discussed previously.
But then this seems countered by practical mathematical use: although legally a mathematical function gives exactly one result for each possible argument value, many common mathematical operations are what we should properly call partial functions.
That is, for some or most input values they give exactly one result, but for other input values they’re undefined and don’t give a result at all.
An example is division when the second operand is zero or sqrt when its argument is negative.
It might seem natural to model these situations by throwing an exception as Java does.
And yes, this does mean that the caller needs to check whether each method call may result in an empty Optional.
This may sound like a huge deal, but pragmatically, given our guidance on functional-style programming versus pure functional programming, you may choose to use exceptions locally but not expose them via large-scale interfaces, thereby gaining the advantages of functional style without the risk of code bloat.
Finally, to be regarded as functional, your function or method should call only those side-effecting library functions for which you can hide their nonfunctional behavior (that is, ensuring that any mutation they make on data structures is hidden from your caller, perhaps by copying first and by catching any exceptions they might raise)
Finally, for pragmatic reasons, you may find it convenient for functional-style code still to be able to output debugging information to some form of log file.
Yes, this means the code can’t be strictly described as functional, but in practice you retain most of the benefits of functional-style programming.
A function is referentially transparent if it always returns the same result value when called with the same argument value.
The method String.replace is referentially transparent because "raoul".replace('r', 'R') will always produce the same result (the method replace returns a new String with all lowercase 'r' replaced with uppercase 'R') rather than updating its this object so it can be considered a function.
Put another way, a function consistently produces the same result given the same input, no matter where and when it’s invoked.
It also explains why we don’t regard Random.nextInt as functional.
In Java using a Scanner object to get the input from a user’s keyboard violates referential transparency because calling the method nextLine may produce a different result at each call.
But adding together two final int variables always produces the same result, because the content of the variables can never change.
It also encompasses a save-instead-of-recompute optimization for expensive or long-lived operations, which goes under the name memoization or caching.
Although important, this is slightly at a tangent to the development here, so we defer this explanation to the next chapter, in section 14.5
Suppose you make two calls to a method that returns a List.
Then the two calls may return references to distinct lists in memory but containing the same elements.
If these lists were to be seen as mutable object-oriented values (and hence non-identical) then the method wouldn’t be referentially transparent.
If you plan to use these lists as pure (immutable) values, then it makes sense to see the values as equal and hence the function as referentially transparent.
In general, in functional-style code you choose to regard such functions as referentially transparent.
We discuss this issue again in the next chapter, in section 14.5
We now explore the issue of whether to mutate from a wider perspective.
We start by contrasting functional-style programming with (extreme) classical object-oriented programming before observing that Java 8 sees these styles as mere extremes of the object-oriented spectrum.
As a Java programmer, without consciously thinking about it, you almost certainly use some aspects of functional-style programming and some aspects of what we’ll call extreme object-oriented programming.
As we remarked in chapter 1, changes in both hardware (for example, multicore) and programmer expectation (for example, database-like queries to manipulate data) are pushing Java software-engineering styles somewhat more to the functional end of this spectrum, and one of the aims of this book is to help you adapt to the changing climate.
At one end of the spectrum is the extreme object-oriented view: everything is an object and programs operate by updating fields and calling methods that update their associated object.
At the other end of the spectrum lies the referentially transparent functional-programming style of no (visible) mutation.
You might traverse a data structure using an Iterator containing mutable internal state but use this to calculate, say, the sum of values in the data structure in a functional-style manner (in Java, as discussed, this can include mutating local variables)
One of the aims of the next sections in this chapter and more generally in the next chapter is to discuss programming techniques and introduce features from functional programming to enable you to write programs that are more modular and more suitable for multicore processors.
Think of these ideas as additional weapons in your programming armory.
There are eight subsets including the empty subset, written {}
This gives an easy, natural, top-down, functional-programming-style encoding in Java.
A common programmer error is to say that an empty list has no subsets.)
We tell such students to calculate instead the list of all permutations of a list; for the example {1,4,9} there are six of these.
Do try it when you’ve defined the two missing methods.
You’ve assumed that the missing methods insertAll and concat are themselves functional and deduced that your function subsets is also, because no operation in it mutates any existing structure.
If you’re familiar with mathematics, then you’ll recognize this argument as being by induction.)
Suppose you defined insertAll so that it mutated its arguments, perhaps by updating all the elements of subans to contain first.
Note that you’re creating a new List that contains all the elements of subans.
You take advantage of the fact that an Integer object is immutable (otherwise you’d have to clone each element too)
The focus caused by thinking of methods like insertAll as functional gives you a natural place to put all this careful copying code—inside insertAll rather in its callers.
In this case, there’s a simple solution, which we beg you not to use (we show it only so you can compare the different styles):
Why? The second version of concat is a pure function.
It may be using mutation (adding elements to the list r) internally, but it returns a result based on its arguments and modifies.
By contrast, the first version relies on the fact that after the call concat(subans, subans2), no one refers to the value of subans ever again.
It turns out that, for our definition of subsets, this is indeed the case, so surely using the cheaper version of concat is better.
Well, it depends on how you value your time spent later searching for obscure bugs compared with the additional cost of making a copy.
No matter how well you comment that the impure concat is “only to be used when the first argument can be arbitrarily overwritten, and only intended to be used in the subsets method, and any change to subsets must be reviewed in the light of this comment,’’ somebody sometime will find it useful in some piece of code where it apparently seems to work, and your future nightmare debugging problem has just been born.
Takeaway point: thinking of programming problems in terms of function-style methods that are characterized only by their input arguments, and their output result (that is, what to do) is often more productive than thinking how to do it and what to mutate too early in the design cycle.
We now turn to recursion in more detail, a technique promoted in functional programming to let you think more in terms of this what to do style.
Pure functional programming languages typically don’t include iterative constructs like while and for loops.
Why? Because such constructs are often a hidden invitation to use mutation.
For example, the condition in a while loop needs to be updated; otherwise the loop would execute zero or an infinite number of times.
But for a lot of use cases loops are perfectly fine.
We’ve argued that to be functional style you’re allowed mutation if no one can see you doing it, meaning it’s acceptable to mutate local variables.
This isn’t a problem because the mutations (both changing the state of the Iterator with the method next and assigning to the variable apple inside the while body) aren’t visible to the caller of the method where the mutations happen.
Indeed, the body of the loop has a side effect that can’t be dismissed as functional style: it mutates the state of the stats object, which is shared with other parts of the program.
Using recursion lets you get rid of iteration variables that are updated step by step.
The first listing demonstrates a standard loop-based form: the variables r and i are updated at each iteration.
The second listing shows a recursive definition (the function calls itself) in a more mathematically familiar form.
In Java, recursive forms are typically less efficient, and we discuss this shortly.
But if you’ve read the earlier chapters of this book, then you know that Java 8 streams provide an even simpler declarative way of defining factorial, as the next listing shows.
As Java users, you should beware of functional-programming zealots who tell you that you should always use recursion instead of iteration.
In general, making a recursive function call is much more expensive than the single machine-level branch instruction needed to iterate.
Why? Every time the factorialRecursive function is called, a new stack frame is created on the call stack to hold the state of each function call (the multiplication it needs to do) until the recursion is done.
This means your recursive definition of factorial will take memory proportional to its input.
This is why if you run factorialRecursive with a large input, you’re likely to receive a StackOverflowError:
The basic idea is that you can write a recursive definition of factorial where the recursive call is the last thing that happens in the function (we say the call is in a tail position)
This different form of recursion style can be optimized to run fast.
The function factorialHelper is tail recursive because the recursive call is the last thing that happens in the function.
By contrast in our previous definition of factorial-Recursive, the last thing was a multiplication of n and the result of a recursive call.
This form of recursion is useful because instead of storing each intermediate result of the recursion onto different stack frames, the compiler can decide to reuse a single stack frame.
Indeed, in the definition of factorialHelper, the intermediate results (the partial results of the factorial) are passed directly as arguments to the function.
There’s no need to keep track of the intermediate result of each recursive call on a separate stack frame—it’s accessible directly through the argument of the function.
Tail-recursive definition of factorial, which can reuse a single stack frame.
The bad news is that Java doesn’t support this kind of optimization.
But adopting tail recursion may be a better practice than classic recursion because it opens the way to eventual compiler optimization.
Many modern JVM languages such as Scala and Groovy can optimize those uses of recursion, which are equivalent to iteration (they’ll execute at the same speed)
This means that pure-functional adherents can have their purity cake and eat it efficiently too.
The guidance when writing Java 8 is that you can often replace iteration with streams to avoid mutation.
In addition, iteration can be replaced with recursion when it lets you write an algorithm in a more concise and side-effect-free way.
Indeed, recursion can make examples easier to read, write, and understand (for example, in the subsets example shown previously), and programmer efficiency is often more important than small differences in execution time.
In this section, we discussed functional-style programming but only used the idea of a method being functional—everything we said would have applied to the very first version of Java.
In the next chapter we look at the amazing and powerful possibilities offered by the introduction of first-class functions in Java 8
Following are the key concepts you should take away from this chapter:
Reducing shared mutable data structures can help you maintain and debug your programs in the long term.
Function-style methods are characterized only by their input arguments and their output result.
A function is referentially transparent if it always returns the same result value when called with the same argument value.
Iterative constructs such aswhile loops can be replaced by recursion.
Tail recursion may be a better practice than classic recursion in Java because it opens the way to eventual compiler optimization.
In chapter 13 you saw how to think functionally; thinking in terms of side-effect-free methods can help you write more maintainable code.
In this chapter, we introduce more advanced functional programming techniques.
You can view this chapter as a mix of practical techniques to apply in your codebase as well as academic information that will make you a more knowledgeable programmer.
We discuss higher-order functions, currying, persistent data structures, lazy lists, pattern matching, caching with referential transparency, and combinators.
Functional-language programmers often use the phrase with more generality to mean that functions may be used like other values: passed as arguments, returned as results, and stored in data structures.
Such functions that may be used like other values are referred to as first-class functions.
In Java 8 it’s perfectly valid to store the method Integer.parseInt in a variable by using a method reference as follows:
Another interesting example was the use of the static method Comparator.comparing, which takes a function as parameter and returns another function (a Comparator), as illustrated in the following code and figure 14.1:
We did something similar when we were composing functions in chapter 3 to create a pipeline of operations:
Functions (like Comparator.comparing) that can do at least one of the following are called higher-order functions within the functional programming community:
Take one or more functions as parameter  Return a function as result.
This directly relates to Java 8 functions because they can not only be passed as arguments but also returned as results, assigned to local variables, or even inserted into structures.
We did something similar when we introduced the factory design pattern in chapter 8
For readers who liked the calculus example at the end of chapter 3, you can regard the type of differentiation as.
We’ve written this as a function type (the leftmost Function) to explicitly affirm the fact that you could pass this differentiating function to yet another function.
But it’s good to recall that the type for differentiating and the signature.
We noted in chapter 7 that functions passed to stream operations should generally be side-effect free, and we noted the problems that arise otherwise (such as incorrect results, perhaps even unpredictable results due to race conditions we hadn’t thought of)
This principle also applies in general when you use higher-order functions.
When writing a higher-order function or method, you don’t know in advance what arguments it will be passed—and if the arguments have side effects, then what these might do! It becomes far too complicated to reason about what your code does if it uses functions passed as arguments that make unpredictable changes to the state of your program; they might even interfere with your code in some hard-to-debug way.
We now turn to currying: a technique that can help you modularize functions and reuse code.
Before we give the theoretical definition of currying, let’s look at an example.
Applications almost always need to be internationalized, and so converting from one set of units to another set is a problem that comes up repeatedly.
The basic pattern of all unit conversion is as follows:
You can express this pattern with the following general method:
Here x is the quantity you want to convert, f is the conversion factor, and b is the baseline.
You’ll typically find you require a lot of conversions between the same pair of units, kilometers to miles, for example.
You could obviously call the converter method with three arguments on each occasion, but supplying the factor and baseline each time would be tedious and you might accidentally mistype them.
You could write a completely new method for each application, but that would miss the reuse of the underlying logic.
Here’s an easy way to benefit from the existing logic while tailoring the converter for particular applications.
You can define a “factory” that manufactures one-argument conversion functions to exemplify the idea of currying.
Now all you have to do is pass it the conversion factor and baseline (f and b), and it will obligingly return a function (of x) to do exactly what you asked for.
For example, you can now use the factory to produce any converter you require:
Because DoubleUnaryOperator defines a method applyAsDouble, you can use your converters as follows:
As a result, your code is more flexible and it reuses the existing conversion logic! Let’s reflect on what you’re doing here.
This enables you to reuse the conversion logic and create different functions with different conversion factors.
Currying is a technique where a function f of two arguments (x and y, say) is seen instead as a function g of one argument that returns a function also of one argument.
When some but fewer than the full complement of arguments have been passed, we often say the function is partially applied.
Can you really program using data structures if you’re forbidden from modifying them?
In this section, we explore the use of data structures used in functional-style programs.
The first thing to note is that a functional-style method isn’t allowed to update any global data structure or any structure passed as a parameter.
Suppose you represent train journeys from A to B as a mutable TrainJourney class (a simple implementation of a singly linked list), with an int field modeling some detail of the journey such as the price of the current leg of the journey.
Journeys requiring you to change trains will have several linked TrainJourney objects using the onward field; a direct train or final leg of a journey will have onward being null:
Now suppose you have separate TrainJourney objects representing a journey from X to Y and from Y to Z.
You may wish to create one journey that links the two TrainJourney objects (that is, X to Y to Z)
A simple traditional imperative method to link these train journeys is as follows:
This works by finding the last leg in the TrainJourney for a and replacing the null marking the end of a’s list with list b (you need a special case if a has no elements)
Here’s the problem: suppose a variable firstJourney contains the route from X to Y and a variable secondJourney contains the route from Y to Z.
If you call link(firstJourney, secondJourney), this code destructively updates firstJourney to also contain secondJourney, so in addition to the single user who requests a trip from X to Z seeing the combined journey as.
We’ve all fought battles with such bugs concerning how visible a change to a data structure should be.
The functional-style approach to this problem is to ban such side-effecting methods.
If you need a data structure to represent the result of a computation, you should make a new one and not mutate an existing data structure as done previously.
This is often best practice in standard object-oriented programming too.
But this leaves traps for maintenance programmers who later will have to deal with your code.
This code is clearly functional style (it uses no mutation at all, even locally) and doesn’t modify any existing data structures.
Note that users are also required not to mutate the result of append because in doing so they may corrupt the trains passed as sequence b.
Before leaving this topic, let’s consider another data structure—that of a binary search tree that might be used to implement a similar interface to a HashMap.
The idea is that a Tree contains a String representing a key and an int representing its value, perhaps names and ages:
You want to make use of the binary search tree for looking up String values to produce an int.
Now consider how you might update the value associated with a given key (for simplicity you’ll start by assuming the key is already present in the tree):
Adding a new node is trickier; the easiest way is to make the method update return the Tree that has just been traversed (this will be unchanged unless you had to add a new node)
This code is now slightly clumsier (because the user needs to remember that update tries to update the tree.
Note that both versions of update once again mutate the existing Tree, meaning that all users of the map stored in the tree will see the mutation.
So how might you do this functionally? You need to create a new node for the new key-value pair, but you also need to create new nodes on the path from the root of the tree to the new node (in general this isn’t very expensive, if the tree is of depth d and reasonably well balanced, then it can have 2d entries, so you re-create only a small fraction of it):
We’ve written this as a single conditional expression instead of using if-then-else to emphasize the idea that the body is only a single expression with no side effects, but you may prefer to write an equivalent if-then-else chain, each containing a return.
So what’s the difference between update and fupdate? We noted previously that the method update assumes every user wants to share the identical data structure and see updates caused by any part of the program.
Hence it’s vital (but often overlooked) in nonfunctional code that whenever you add some form of structured value to a tree, you copy it, because, who knows, someone may later assume they can update it.
It creates a new Tree as a result but sharing as much as it can with its argument.
You have a tree consisting of nodes storing a name and an age of a person.
No existing data structure was harmed during the making of this update to the Tree.
There’s just one proviso: the other side of the treaty is you require all users of persistent data structures to follow the do-not-mutate requirement.
If not, a programmer who disregards this might mutate the result of fupdate (for example, changing Emily’s 20)
This would then be visible as an (almost certainly unwanted) unexpected and delayed change to the data structure passed as argument to fupdate!
You can get the compiler to help enforce this “no mutation of existing structure” rule by declaring fields key, val, left, and right of class Tree to be final; but remember that final protects only a field and not the object pointed to, which may need its own fields to be final to protect it, and so on.
The other is the functional-style solution: you logically make a new data structure whenever you do an update (so nothing is ever mutated) and just arrange to pass the correct version of the data structure to users as appropriate.
If certain clients of the data structure need to have updates visible, they should go through an API that returns the latest version.
Clients who don’t want updates visible (such as for long-running statistical analysis) simply use whatever copy they retrieved, knowing that it can’t be mutated from under them.
One might remark that this technique is like “updating” a file on a CD-R, which allows a file to be written only once by burning with a laser; multiple versions of the file are all stored on the CD (smart CD authoring software might even share common parts of multiple versions), and you pass the appropriate block address of the start of file (or a filename encoding the version within its name) to select which version you want to use.
In Java things are rather better than on a CD, in that old versions of the data structure that can no longer be used will be garbage collected.
You saw in previous chapters that streams are a great way to process a collection of data.
But for various reasons, including efficient implementation, the Java 8 designers added streams to Java in a rather specific way.
In particular, one limitation is that you can’t define a stream recursively because a stream can be consumed only once.
We show in the coming section how this can sometimes be problematic.
Let’s revisit our example from chapter 6 of generating prime numbers to understand this idea of a recursive stream.
You saw that, perhaps as part of the class MyMathUtils, you can compute a stream of prime numbers as follows:
But this solution is somewhat awkward: you have to iterate through every number every time to see if it can be exactly divided by a candidate number.
Actually you need only test with numbers that have been already classified as prime.)
Ideally the stream should filter out numbers divisible by the prime it’s producing on the go! This sounds crazy, so we’ll try to sketch out how this might work:
You need a stream of numbers from which you’ll select prime numbers.
From that stream you take the first number (the head of the stream), which will be a prime number (at the initial step this will be 2)
You then filter all the numbers divisible by that number from the tail of the stream.
The resulting tail is the new stream of numbers that you can use to find prime numbers.
Essentially you go back to step 1, so this algorithm is recursive.
Let’s try to write this algorithm using the Streams API.
More information about why the algorithm is poor can be found at www.cs.hmc.edu/~oneill/papers/Sieve-JFP.pdf.
An IntStream comes with the method findFirst, which can be used to return the first element:
Define a method to get the tail of a stream:
Given the head of the stream, you can filter the numbers as follows:
You might be tempted to try passing back the resulting filtered stream so you can take its head and filter more numbers, like this:
There’s an additional, more important problem: the static method IntStream.concat expects two instances of a stream.
Nonetheless, the more-general features and models of streams from functional languages such as Scala and Haskell can be a useful addition to your programming tool box.
What you need is a way to lazily evaluate the call to the method primes in the second argument of concat.
In a more technical programming language vocabulary we refer to this as lazy evaluation, nonstrict evaluation, or even call by name.) Only when you need to process the prime numbers (for example, with the method limit) should the stream be evaluated.
Scala (which we explore in the next chapter) provides support for this idea.
In Scala you can write the previous algorithm as follows, where the operator #:: does lazy concatenation (the arguments are evaluated only when you need to actually consume the stream):
Its only purpose is to show you an area of difference between Java and other functional programming languages.
It’s good to reflect just a moment about how the arguments are evaluated.
In Java when you call a method, all its arguments are fully evaluated immediately.
But in Scala using #::, the concatenation returns immediately and the elements are evaluated only when needed.
Now we turn to implementing this idea of lazy lists directly in Java.
They’re lazy in one particular aspect: a stream behaves like a black box that can generate values on request.
When you apply a sequence of operations to a stream, these are merely saved up.
This has the great advantage when you apply several operations (perhaps a filter and a map followed by a terminal operation reduce) to a stream; then the stream has to be traversed only once instead of for each operation.
In this section we consider the notion of lazy lists, which are a form of a more general stream (lazy lists form a similar concept to stream)
Lazy lists also provide an excellent way of thinking about higher-order functions; you place a function value into a data structure so most of the time it can sit there unused, but when it’s called (that is, on demand) it can create more of the data structure.
Elements of a LinkedList exist (are spread out) in memory.
But elements of a LazyList are created on demand by a Function—you can see them as spread out in time.
What you want to achieve is to generate an infinite list of prime numbers using the algorithm we described earlier.
Recall that you can define a simple linked-list-style class called MyLinkedList in Java by writing it as follows (here we only consider a minimal MyList interface):
You can now construct a sample MyLinkedList value as follows:
Calling the method get from the Supplier causes the creation of a node of the Lazy-List (as a factory would create a new object)
You can now create the infinite lazy list of numbers starting at n as follows by passing a Supplier as the tail argument of the LazyList constructor, which creates the next element in the series of numbers:
See if you can use what you’ve done so far to generate a self-defining lazy list of prime numbers (something you were unable to do with the Streams API)
If you were to translate the code that was using the Streams API earlier using our new LazyList, it would look like something like this:
Unfortunately, a LazyList (more accurately the List interface) doesn’t define a filter method, so the previous code won’t compile! Let’s fix this and declare one:
Your code now compiles and is ready for use! You can calculate the first three prime numbers by chaining calls to tail and head:
You can now have some fun; for example, you could print all the prime numbers (the program will run infinitely by writing a printAll method, which iteratively prints the head and tail of a list:
This being a functional programming chapter, we should explain that you could do this neatly recursively:
But this program wouldn’t run infinitely; sadly it would eventually fail due to stack overflow because Java doesn’t support tail call elimination, as discussed in chapter 13
So you’ve built a whole lot of technology: lazy lists and functions using them just to define a data structure containing all the primes.
This might be useful if you’re writing a game-playing program, perhaps for chess; you can have a data structure that notionally represents the whole tree of possible moves (far too big to.
This would be a lazy tree as opposed to a lazy list.
We concentrated on lazy lists because they provide a link back to another Java 8 feature, streams, and we could then discuss the pros and cons of streams compared to lazy lists.
It’s easy to assume that doing things lazily will be better than doing things eagerly—surely it’s better to calculate only the values and data structures needed by a program on demand than to create all those values (and perhaps some more) as done under traditional execution.
The overhead of doing things lazily (for example, the additional Suppliers between each item in your LazyList) outweighs the notional benefit unless you explore, say, less than 10% of the data structure.
Finally, there’s a subtle way in which your LazyList values aren’t truly lazy.
This can be achieved by adding a private Optional<LazyList<T>> alreadyComputed field to your definition of LazyList and arranging for the method tail to consult and update it appropriately.
The pure functional language Haskell arranges that all its data structures are properly lazy in this latter sense.
Read one of the many articles on Haskell if you’re interested.
Our guideline is to remember that lazy data structures can be a useful weapon in your programming armory.
Use them when they make an application easier to program.
Rewrite them in more traditional style only if they cause unacceptable inefficiency.
Now let’s turn to another feature of almost all functional programming languages but one that’s lacking from Java: pattern matching.
There’s one other important aspect to what’s generally regarded as functional programming, and that’s (structural) pattern matching (not to be confused with pattern matching and regex)
Recall that chapter 1 ended by observing that mathematics can write definitions such as.
As data types become more complex, the amount of code (and clutter) needed to process them increases.
To illustrate, let’s take a tree structure that you’d like to traverse.
Consider a simple arithmetic language consisting of numbers and binary operations:
Say you’re asked to write a method to simplify some expressions.
Another way to unwrap the data type in Java is to make use of the visitor design pattern.
In essence, you can create a separate class that encapsulates an algorithm to “visit” a specific data type.
How does it work? The visitor class needs to take as input a specific instance of the data type.
First, you add the method accept to BinOp, which takes SimplifyExprVisitor as argument and passes itself to it (you also add a similar method for Number):
The SimplifyExprVisitor can now access a BinOp object and unwrap it:
There’s a simpler solution using a feature called pattern matching.
It’s not available in Java, so we’re going to use small examples from the Scala programming language to exemplify pattern matching.
It will give you an idea of what could be possible in Java if pattern matching were supported.
Given data type Expr representing arithmetic expressions, in the Scala programming language (we use it because its syntax is the closest to Java), you can write the following code to decompose an expression:
This use of pattern matching gives an extremely concise and expressive way to manipulate many tree-like data structures.
It’s typically useful when building compilers or engines for processing business rules.
The main visible syntactic difference is that Scala is expression-oriented whereas Java is more statement-oriented, but the main expressiveness difference for the programmer is that Java patterns in case labels are restricted to a couple of primitive types, enumerations, a few special classes that wrap certain primitive types, and Strings.
One of the biggest practical advantages of using languages with pattern matching is that you can avoid using big chains of switch or if-then-else statements interleaved with field-selection operations.
Here it’s clear that Scala’s pattern matching wins on ease of expressiveness over Java, and you can only look forward to a future Java allowing more expressive switch statements.
We make a concrete proposal for this in chapter 16
In the meantime, let’s see how Java 8 lambdas can provide an alternative way of achieving pattern-matching-like code in Java.
We describe this technique purely so you can see another interesting application of lambdas.
First, let’s consider just how rich Scala’s pattern-matching match expression form is.
Now that you have lambdas, you could in principle never use if-then-else in your code.
Somewhere, perhaps in a library, you’d have a definition (generic in type T):
The type T plays the role of result type of the conditional expression.
Of course, in normal code this would just make your code more obscure because if-then-else perfectly captures this idiom.
But we’ve noted that Java’s switch and if-then-else don’t capture the idiom of pattern matching, and it turns out that lambdas can simply encode (single-level) pattern matching—and rather more neatly than the chains of if-then-else.
Returning to pattern-matching values of class Expr, which has two subclasses, BinOp and Number, you can define a method patternMatchExpr (again generic in T, the result type of the pattern match):
The method even makes provision for defaultcode, which would be executed if someone later created a tree node that was neither a BinOp nor a Number.
The following listing shows how to start using patternMatchExpr by simplifying addition and multiplication expressions.
You’ve seen a lot of information so far: higher-order functions, currying, persistent data structures, lazy lists, and pattern matching! We now look at certain subtleties, which we’ve deferred until the end to avoid overcomplicating the text.
In this section we explore two subtleties of being functional and of having referential transparency; one concerns efficiency and the other concerns returning the same result.
These are interesting issues, but we place them here because they’re subtleties concerning side effects rather than conceptually central.
Suppose you have a side-effect-free method computeNumberOfNodes(Range) that calculates the number of nodes inside a given range in a network with a tree-like topology.
Let’s assume the network never changes (that is, the structure is immutable), but calling the method computeNumberOfNodes is expensive to calculate because the structure needs to be traversed recursively.
You may want to calculate the results over and over again.
If you have referential transparency, there’s a clever way of avoiding this additional overhead.
It first consults the cache to see if the (argument, result) pair is already in the cache; if so, it can return the stored result immediately; otherwise, you call computeNumberOfNodes, but before returning from the wrapper you store the new (argument, result) pair in the cache.
Strictly speaking, this is a nonpurely functional solution because it mutates a data structure shared by multiple callers, but the wrapped version of the code is referentially transparent.
Java 8 enhances the Map interface with a method computeIfAbsent for such use cases.
But for your information you could use the method computeIfAbsent as follows to write clearer code:
It’s clear that the method computeNumberOfNodesUsingCache is referentially transparent (assuming the method computeNumberOfNodes is also referentially transparent)
But the fact that numberOfNodes is mutable shared state, and that HashMap isn’t synchronized,[2] means that this code isn’t thread-safe.
Even using (lock-protected) Hashtable or (concurrent-without-locking) ConcurrentHashMap instead of HashMap may not give the expected performance if there are parallel calls to numberOfNodes from multiple cores, because there’s a race condition between your finding that range isn’t in the map and inserting the (argument, result) pair back into the map.
This means multiple processes might compute the same value to add to the map.
It’s so easy to use HashMap here and to forget the fact that the Java manual notes that it’s not thread-safe (or to simply not care because our program is currently single-threaded)
Perhaps the best thing to take away from this struggle is that mixing mutable state with concurrency is trickier than you’d imagine, and functional-style programming avoids it entirely, except for low-level performance hacks such as caching.
A second thing is that apart from implementing tricks like caching, if you code in functional style, then you never need to care whether or not another functional-style method you call is synchronized, because you know it has no shared mutable state.
Let’s consider again the binary tree example from section 14.2.3
Now suppose you perform a textually identical call in the additional assignment:
We can debate this point at length, but the simplest adage is that functional-style programming data isn’t modified, and under this model fupdate is referentially transparent.
In functional programming it’s common and natural to write a higher-order function (perhaps written as a method) that accepts, say, two functions and produces another function somehow combining these functions.
Much of the new Java 8 API is inspired by this idea; for example, thenCombine in the CompletableFuture class.
This method takes two CompletableFutures and a BiFunction to produce another CompletableFuture.
Although a detailed discussion of combinators in functional programming is beyond the scope of this book, it’s worth looking at a couple of special cases to give the flavor of how operations that take and return functions are a very common and natural functional programming construct.
It takes functions f and g as arguments and returns a function whose effect is to do f first and then g.
You can then use this to define an operation, which captures internal iteration as a combinator.
Let’s look at the case where you wish to take data and apply function f to it repeatedly, say n times, as in a loop.
Your operation, let’s call it repeat, takes a function, f, saying what happens in one iteration and returning a function that says what happens in n iterations.
The method repeat can be coded as follows (note the special case of a zero-trip loop):
Variants of this idea can model richer notions of iteration, including having a functional model of mutable state passed between iterations.
But it’s now time to move on; this chapter’s role is to give a summary of functional programming as the basis behind Java 8
There are many excellent books exploring functional programming in greater depth.
Following are the key concepts you should take away from this chapter:
First-class functions are functions that can be passed as arguments, returned as results, and stored in data structures.
A higher-order function is a function that takes at least one or more functions as input or returns another function.
Typical higher-order functions in Java include comparing, andThen, and compose.
Currying is a technique that lets you modularize functions and reuse code.
A persistent data structure preserves the previous version of itself when it’s modified.
A lazy list is a more expressive version of a Java stream.
A lazy list lets you produce elements of the list.
Pattern matching is a functional feature that lets you unwrap data types.
Combinators are a functional idea that combines two or more functions or other data structures.
Scala is a programming language that mixes object-oriented and functional programming.
It’s often seen as an alternative language to Java for programmers who want functional features in a statically typed programming language that runs on the JVM while keeping a Java feel.
Scala introduces many more features compared to Java: a more sophisticated type system, type inference, pattern matching (as presented in section 14.4), constructs to simply define domain specific languages, and so on.
In addition, you can access all Java libraries within Scala code.
You may be wondering why we have a chapter about Scala in a Java 8 book.
This book has been largely centered on adopting functional-style programming in Java.
Scala, just like Java 8, supports the concepts of functional-style processing of collections (that is, stream-like operations), first-class functions, and default methods.
But Scala pushes these ideas further: it provides a larger set of features around these ideas compared to Java 8
This chapter aims to shed light on this matter to appease your curiosity.
Keep in mind that the purpose of this chapter is not to teach you how to write idiomatic Scala code or everything about Scala.
There are many features such as pattern matching, for comprehensions and implicits supported in Scala but not in Java, that we won’t discuss.
Rather, this chapter focuses on comparing the new Java 8 features to what Scala provides, so you have an idea of the bigger picture.
For example, you’ll find that you can write more concise and readable code in Scala compared to Java.
This chapter starts with an introduction to Scala: how to write simple programs and working with collections.
Next, we discuss functions in Scala: first-class functions, closures, and currying.
Finally, we look at classes in Scala and a feature called traits: Scala’s take on interfaces and default methods.
This section briefly introduces basic Scala features so you can get a feel for simple Scala programs.
Finally, we present traits, Scala’s replacement for Java’s interfaces, which also support inheritance of methods at object-instantiation time.
Let’s look at a simple example so you get a feel for Scala’s syntax and features and how they compare to Java.
You want to print the following output on the screen:
Here’s how the code to print this output looks in Scala using an imperative style:
Information on how to run this code can be found on the official Scala website.[1] This program looks quite similar to what you’d write in Java.
It has a structure similar to Java programs: it consists of one method called main, which takes an array of strings as argument (type annotations follow the syntax s : String instead of String s like in Java)
The main method doesn’t return a value, and so it’s not necessary to declare a return type in Scala as you’d have to do in Java using void.
In general, nonrecursive method declarations in Scala don’t need an explicit return type because Scala can infer it for you.
Before we look at the body of the main method, we need to discuss the object declaration.
After all, in Java you have to declare the method main within a class.
The declaration object introduces a singleton object: it declares a class Beer and instantiates it at the same time.
It also looks similar to Java, but statements don’t need to end with a semicolon (it’s optional)
The body consists of a while loop, which increments a mutable variable, n.
For each new value of n you print a string on the screen using the predefined method println.
The println line showcases another feature available in Scala: string interpolation.
String interpolation allows you to embed variables and expressions directly in string literals.
In the previous code you can use the variable n directly in the string literal s"Hello ${n} bottles of beer"
Prepending the string with the interpolator s provides that magic.
It looks similar to the Java code but is less verbose.
Here’s something cool: 2 is an object of type Int.
In Scala everything is an object; there’s no concept of primitive types like in Java.
An Int object in Scala supports a method named to, which takes as argument another Int and returns a range.
But methods that take one argument can be written in an infix form.
Next, foreach (with a lowercase e) is similar to forEach in Java 8 (with an uppercase E)
It’s a method available on a range (here you use the infix notation again), and it takes a lambda expression as argument to apply on each The previous code is functional: you’re not mutating a variable as you did in our earlier example using a while loop.
Creating collections in Scala is simple, thanks to its emphasis on conciseness.
First, it’s pretty awesome that you can create a Map and associate a key to a value directly, using the syntax ->
There’s no need to add elements manually like in Java:
There are discussions to add similar syntactic sugar in future versions of Java, but it’s not available in Java 8.[3] The second new thing is that you can choose not to annotate the type of the variable authorsToAge.
Note that the code is still statically checked! All variables have a given type at compile time.) We’ll come back to this feature later in the chapter.
What’s the difference? The keyword val means that the variable is read-only and can’t be reassigned to (just like final in Java)
What about other collections? You can create a List (a singly linked list) or a Set (no duplicates) as easily:
The authors variable will have three elements and the numbers variable will have five elements.
One important property to keep in mind is that the collections created previously are immutable by default.
This is useful because you know that accessing the collection at any point in your program will always yield a collection with the same elements.
As a consequence of this property, your code will have fewer implicit data dependences: there’s less.
Instead, a new Set is created with an additional element.
Note that Scala doesn’t force you to use immutable collections—it just makes it easy to adopt immutability in your code.
There are also mutable versions available in the package scala.collection.mutable.
In the following code the variable newNumbers is a read-only view of the set numbers:
This means you won’t be able to add new elements through the newNumbers variable.
But an unmodifiable collection is just a wrapper over a modifiable collection.
This means that you could still add elements by accessing the numbers variable!
By contrast, immutable collections guarantee that nothing can change the collection, regardless of how many variables are pointing to it.
We explained in chapter 14 how you could create a persistent data structure: an immutable data structure that preserves the previous version of itself when modified.
Now that you’ve seen how to create collections, you need to know what you can do with them.
It turns out that collections in Scala support operations similar to what the Streams API provides.
For instance, you’ll recognize filter and map in the following example and as illustrated in figure 15.1:
Don’t worry about the first line; it basically transforms a file into a list of strings consisting of the lines in the file (similar to what Files.readAllLines provides in Java 8)
You use the infix notation as well as the underscore (_), which is a placeholder that’s the functions passed to filter and map, the underscore is bound to the line parameter that is to be processed.
There are many more useful operations available in Scala’s collection API.
We recommend taking a look at the Scala documentation to get an idea.[4] Note that it’s slightly richer than what.
These idioms may also make it into the Streams API in future versions of Java.
A list of notable and other packages can be found at www.scala-lang.org/api/current/#package.
Finally, remember that in Java 8 you could ask for a pipeline to be executed in parallel by calling parallel on a Stream.
Scala has a similar trick; you only need to use the method par:
Let’s now look at another feature that’s often painfully verbose in Java: tuples.
Scala provides tuple literals, which means you can create tuples through simple syntactic sugar—just the normal mathematical notation:
Scala supports arbitrary-sized[5] tuples, so the following are all possible:
The collections we described so far, List, Set, Map, and Tuple, are all evaluated eagerly (that is, immediately)
Of course by now you know that streams in Java 8 are evaluated on demand (that is, lazily)
You saw in chapter 5 that because of this property streams can represent an infinite sequence without overflowing the memory.
Scala provides a corresponding lazily evaluated data structure called Stream too! But Streams in Scala provide more features than those in Java.
Streams in Scala remember values that were computed so previous elements can be accessed.
In addition, Streams are indexed so elements can be accessed by an index just like a list.
Another data structure that you’ll be familiar with is Option.
We argued that you should use Optional when possible to design better APIs, in which just by reading the signature of a method users can tell whether or not they can expect an optional value.
It should be used instead of null when possible to prevent null pointer exceptions.
You saw in chapter 10 that you could use Optional to return the insurance’s name of a person if their age is greater than a minimum age, as follows:
In Scala you can use Option in a way similar to Optional:
You can recognize the same structure and method names apart from getOrElse, which is the equivalent of orElse in Java 8
You see, throughout this book you’ve learned new concepts that can be directly applied to other programming languages! Unfortunately, null also exists in Scala for Java compatibility reasons and its use is highly discouraged.
In Scala parentheses aren’t required when calling a method that takes no parameters.
Scala functions can be seen as a sequence of instructions that are grouped together to perform a task.
They’re useful to abstract behavior and are the cornerstone of functional programming.
In Java, you’re familiar withmethods: functions associated with a class.
You’ve also seen lambda expressions, which can be considered anonymous functions.
Scala offers a richer set of features around functions than Java does, which we look at in this section.
Function types, syntactic sugar to represent the idea of Java function descriptors (that is, a notation to represent the signature of the abstract method declared in a functional interface), which we described in chapter 3
Anonymous functions that don’t have the write restrictions on nonlocal variables that Java’s lambda expressions have.
Support for currying, which means breaking down a function that takes multiple arguments into a series of functions that take part of the arguments.
This means they can be passed around as parameters, returned as a result, and stored in variables, just like other values such as an Integer or a String.
As we’ve shown you in earlier chapters, method references and lambda expressions in Java 8 can also be seen as first-class functions.
Let’s look at an example of how first-class functions work in Scala.
Let’s say you have a list of strings representing tweets people are sending to you.
You’d like to filter this list with different criteria, for example, tweets that mention the word Java or tweets that have a short length.
You can represent these two criteria as predicates (functions that return a Boolean):
In Scala you can pass these methods directly to the built-in filter as follows (just as you could pass them using method references in Java):
Now let’s inspect the signature of the built-in method filter:
Here it represents a function that takes an object of type T and returns a Boolean.
This is exactly the same signature as the methods isJava-Mentioned and isShortTweet so you can pass them as argument to filter.
The Java 8 language designers decided not to introduce a similar syntax for function types in order to keep the language consistent with previous versions.
Introducing too much new syntax in a new version of the language is seen as too much additional cognitive overhead.)
In the following example you can assign to a variable named isLongTweet an anonymous function that checks whether a given tweet is long:
Now in Java, a lambda expression lets you create an instance of a functional interface.
The previous code is syntactic sugar for declaring an anonymous class of type scala.Function1 (a function of one parameter), which provides the implementation of the method apply:
Because the variable isLongTweet holds an object of type Function1, you can call the method apply, which can be seen as calling the function:
To use lambda expressions, Java provides several built-in functional interfaces such as Predicate, Function, and Consumer.
Another cool trick in Scala is that you can call the method apply using syntactic sugar that looks more like a function call:
In chapter 3 we commented on whether lambda expressions in Java constitute closures.
To refresh, a closure is an instance of a function that can reference nonlocal variables of that function with no restrictions.
But lambda expressions in Java 8 have a restriction: they can’t modify the content of local variables of a method in which the lambda is defined.
It helps to think that lambdas close over values, rather than variables.
In contrast, anonymous functions in Scala can capture variables themselves, not the values to which the variables currently refer.
But in Java the following will result in a compiler error because count is implicitly forced to be final:
In chapter 14 we described a technique called currying: where a function f of two arguments (x and y, say) is seen instead as a function g of one argument, which returns a function also of one argument.
This definition can be generalized to functions with multiple arguments, producing multiple functions of one argument.
In other words, you can break down a function that takes multiple arguments into a series of functions that take a subpart of the arguments.
Scala provides a construct to let you easily curry an existing function.
To understand what Scala brings to the table, let’s first revisit an example in Java.
You can define a simple method to multiply two integers:
But this definition requires all the arguments to be passed to it.
You can manually break down the multiply method by making it return another function:
The function returned by multiplyCurry captures the value of x and multiplies it by its argument y, returning an Integer.
This means you can use multiplyCurry as follows in a map to multiply each element by 2:
This works because map expects a Function as argument and multiplyCurry returns a Function!
Now it’s a bit tedious in Java to manually split up a function to create a curried form (especially if the function has multiple arguments)
Using the (x: Int)(y: Int) syntax, the multiplyCurry method takes two argument lists of one Int parameter.
In contrast, multiply takes one list of two Int parameters.
We say this function is partially applied as explained in section 14.1.2, because not all arguments are provided.
This means you can store the first invocation to multiplyCurry inside a variable and reuse it:
In comparison with Java, in Scala you don’t need to manually provide the curried form of a function as done here.
Scala provides a convenient function-definition syntax to indicate that a function has multiple curried argument lists.
We now look at how classes and interfaces in Java compare to Scala.
You’ll see that Scala’s classes and interfaces can provide more flexibility than what Java offers.
Because Scala is also a full object-oriented language, you can create classes and instantiate them to produce objects.
At its most basic form, the syntax to declare and instantiate classes is similar to Java.
It becomes more interesting once you have a class with fields.
A large amount of code is typically devoted to such classes in Enterprise Java applications.
You have to manually define the constructor that initializes all fields, two getters, and two setters.
In Scala, constructors, getters, and setters can be implicitly generated, which results in code with less verbosity:
A trait can define both abstract methods and methods with a default implementation.
Traits can also be multiple inherited just like interfaces in Java, so you can see them as similar to Java 8’s interfaces that support default methods.
Traits can also contain fields like an abstract class, which Java 8 interfaces don’t support.
No, because traits can be multiple inherited, unlike abstract classes.
Java has always had multiple inheritance of types because a class can implement multiple interfaces.
Now Java 8, through default methods, introduces multiple inheritance of behaviors but still doesn’t allow multiple inheritance of state, something permitted by Scala traits.
To show an example of what a trait looks like in Scala, let’s define a trait called Sized that contains one mutable field called size and one method called isEmpty with a default implementation:
You can now compose it at declaration time with a class, here an Empty class that always has size 0:
Interestingly, compared to Java interfaces, traits can also be composed at object instantiation time (but it’s still a compile-time operation)
For example, you can create a Box class and decide that one specific instance should support the operations defined by the trait Sized:
Following are the key concepts you should take away from this chapter:
Both Java 8 and Scala combine object-oriented and functional programming features into one programming language; both run on the JVM and to a large extent can interoperate.
Scala provides richer features around functions than Java 8: function types, closures that have no restrictions on accessing local variables, and built-in currying forms.
Classes in Scala can provide implicit constructors, getters, and setters.
Scala supports traits: interfaces that can include both fields and default methods.
We covered a lot of material in this book, and we hope you now feel that you’re ready to start using the new Java 8 features in your own code, perhaps building on our examples and quizzes.
In this chapter we review the journey of learning about Java 8 and the gentle push toward functional-style programming.
In addition, we speculate on what future enhancements and great new features may be in Java’s pipeline beyond Java 8
A good way to help you understand Java 8 as a practical, useful language is to revisit the features in turn.
Instead of simply listing them, we’d like to present them as being interlinked to help you understand them not merely as a set of features but as a high-level overview of the coherent language design that is Java 8
Our other aim in this review chapter is to emphasize how most of the new features in Java 8 are facilitating functional-style programming in Java.
Remember, this isn’t a capricious design choice but a conscious design strategy, centered on two trends, which we regard as climate change in the model from chapter 1:
The increasing need to exploit the power of multicore processors now that, for silicon technology reasons, the additional transistors annually provided by Moore’s law no longer translate into higher clock speeds of individual CPU cores.
Put simply, making your code run faster requires parallel code.
The increasing tendency to concisely manipulate collections of data with a declarative style for processing data, such as taking some data source, extracting all data that matches a given criterion, and applying some operation to the result—either summarizing it or making a collection of the result for further processing later.
This style is associated with the use of immutable objects and collections, which are then processed to produce further immutable values.
Neither motivation is effectively supported by the traditional, object-oriented, imperative approach, centered on mutating fields and applying iterators.
Mutating data on one core and reading it from another is surprisingly expensive, not to mention the need for error-prone locking; similarly when your mind-set is focused on iterating over and mutating existing objects,
But these two trends are easily supported using ideas from functional programming, and this explains why the Java 8 center of gravity has moved a bit from what we’ve come to expect from Java.
Let’s now review, in a big-picture unifying view, what you’ve learned from this book, and see how it all fits together in the new climate.
To be able to write a reusable method such as filter, you need to be able to specify as its argument a description of the filtering criterion.
Although Java experts could achieve this in previous versions of Java (by wrapping the filtering criterion as a method inside a class and passing an instance of that class), this solution was unsuitable for general use because it was too cumbersome to write and maintain.
Passing a lambda, a one-off piece of code such as.
Passing amethod reference, to an existing method, as code such as Apple::isHeavy.
Of themselves, lambdas can seem rather a niche concept, but it’s the way Java 8 uses them in much of the new Streams API that propels them to the center of Java.
The collection classes in Java, along with iterators and the for-each construct, have served us honorably for a long time.
It would have been easy for the Java 8 designers to add methods like filter and map to collections, exploiting the lambdas mentioned previously to express database-like queries.
What’s wrong with collections that requires them to be replaced or augmented with a similar but different notion of streams? We’ll summarize it like this: if you have a large collection and apply.
The Streams API instead lazily forms these operations into a pipeline, and then does a single stream traversal performing all the operations together.
This is much more efficient for large datasets, and for reasons such as memory caches, the larger the dataset the more important it is to minimize the number of traversals.
The other, no less important, reasons concern the ability to process elements in parallel, which is vital to efficiently exploit multicore CPUs.
Streams, in particular the method parallel, allow a stream to be marked as suitable for parallel processing.
Recall here that parallelism and mutable state fit badly together, so core functional concepts (side-effect-free operations and methods parameterized with lambdas and method references that permit internal iteration instead of external iteration, as discussed in chapter 4) are central to exploiting streams in parallel using map, filter, and the like.
Let’s now look at how these ideas, which we introduced in terms of streams, have a direct analog in the design of CompletableFuture.
Futures are useful for exploiting multicore because they allow a task to be spawned onto another thread or core and allow the spawning task to continue executing along with the spawned task.
When the spawning task needs the result, it can use the get method to wait for the Future to complete (produce its value)
Stream lets you pipeline operations and provides behavior parameterization with map, filter, and the like, thus avoiding the boilerplate code you typically have to write using iterators.
Similarly, CompletableFuture provides operations such as thenCompose, thenCombine, and allOf, which give functional-programming-style concise encodings of common design patterns involving Futures, and let you avoid similar imperative-style boilerplate code.
This style of operations, albeit in a simpler scenario, also applies to the Java 8 operations on Optional, which we now revisit.
This is great for program comprehension and documentation; it provides a data type with an explicit missing value—instead of the previous error-prone use of the null pointer to indicate missing values, which we could never be sure was a planned missing value or an accidental null resulting from an earlier erroneous computation.
These have similar behavior to corresponding methods in the Streams class and can be used to chain computations, again in functional style, with the tests for missing value done by the library instead of user code.
This internal testing versus external testing choice is directly analogous to how the Streams library does internal iteration versus external iteration in user code.
Our final topic of this section concerns not functional-style programming but instead Java 8 support for upward-compatible library extensions driven by software-engineering desires.
There are other additions to Java 8, none of which particularly affect the expressiveness of any individual program.
But one thing that is helpful for library designers is the addition to allow default methods to be added to an interface.
Prior to Java 8, interfaces defined method signatures; now they can also provide default implementations for methods that the interface designer suspects not all clients will want to provide explicitly.
This is a great new tool for library designers, because it provides them with the ability to augment an interface with a new operation, without having to require all clients (classes implementing this interface) to add code to define this method.
Therefore, default methods are also relevant to users of libraries because they shield them from future interface changes.
We now turn to the thornier subject of what future enhancements and great new features may be in Java’s pipeline beyond Java 8
Let’s look at some of these points, most of which are discussed in more detail on the JDK Enhancement Proposal website at http://openjdk.java.net/jeps/0
Here we take care to explain why seemingly sensible ideas have subtle difficulties or interaction with existing features that inhibit their direct incorporation into Java.
Occasionally a new feature is so obviously better (for example, collections over arrays) that we fail to notice that some aspect of the supplanted feature hasn’t been carried across.
For example, Java arrays can be declared and initialized with syntax such as.
Java collections (via the Collection interface) were introduced as a better and more uniform way of dealing with sequences of data such as that represented by arrays.
What you’d like to be able to say is something like.
This seems uncontroversial as a feature,[1] but it’s not yet part of Java.
We discuss two possible enhancements to Java type’s system: declaration-site variance and local variable type inference.
Java supports wildcards as a flexible mechanism to allow subtyping for generics (more generally referred to as use-site variance)
But the following assignment, omitting the ? extends, gives a compile-time error:
Many programming languages such as C# and Scala support a different variance mechanism called declaration-site variance.
They allow programmers to specify variance when defining a generic class.
This feature is useful for classes that are inherently variant.
Iterator, for example, is inherently covariant and Comparator is inherently contravariant.
This is why adding declaration-site variance to Java would be useful because these specifications instead appear at the declaration of classes.
As a result, it would reduce some cognitive overhead for programmers.
Originally in Java, whenever we introduced a variable or method, we gave its type at the same time.
First, you may omit type parameters of generics in an expression when the context determines them.
Type inference gives a few advantages when a type consists of a single identifier, the main one being reduced editing work when replacing one type with another.
For example, the declaration of myMap shown previously using Java syntax could be rendered like this:
Of course, it’s important that type inference be done sensibly.
Type inference works best when there’s only one way, or one easily documentable way, to re-create the type the user has omitted.
It’s a source of problems if the system infers a different type from the one the user was thinking of; so a good design of type inference will give a fault when there are two different incomparable types that could be inferred instead of appearing just to pick the wrong one seemingly at random.
This idea is called local variable type inference; you can expect similar developments in Java because they decrease clutter caused by redundant type repetition.
There’s some small cause for concern, however; given a class Car that subclasses a class Vehicle and then does the declaration.
It’s worth reminding you here that traditional object-oriented design discourages the use of switch and instead encourages patterns such as the visitor pattern where data-type-dependent control flow is done by method dispatch instead of by switch.
This isn’t the case at the other end of the programming language spectrum—in functional-style programming where pattern matching over values of data types is often the most convenient way to design a program.
Adding Scala-style pattern matching in full generality to Java seems quite a big job, but following the recent generalization to switch to allow Strings, you can imagine a more-modest syntax extension, which allows switch to operate on objects, using the instanceof syntax.
Here we revisit our example from section 14.4 and assume a class Expr, which is subclassed into BinOp and Number:
We steal from pattern matching the idea that in case (op instanceof BinOp):, op is a new local variable (of type BinOp), which becomes bound to the same value as someExpr; similarly, in the Number case, n becomes a variable of type Number.
This proposal avoids much boilerplate code compared with using chains of if-then-else and casting to subtype.
A traditional object-oriented designer would probably argue that such data-type dispatch code would better be expressed using visitor-style methods overridden in subtypes, but to functional-programming eyes this results in.
This section discusses two limitations of Java generics and looks at a possible evolution to mitigate them.
When generics were introduced in Java 5, they had to be backward-compatible with the existing JVM.
There are certain small runtime costs associated with this choice, but the most significant effect for programmers is that parameters to generic types can only be Objects.
Then you could allocate an ArrayList object on the heap containing a primitive value such as int Object value such as a String or a primitive int value such as 42
But even if they are the same, sufficient type information is kept at run-time to allow, for example, garbage collection to determine whether a field is a reference or a primitive.
This is called the reified model of generic polymorphism or, more simply, reified generics.
Reified generics are clearly desirable; they enable a more full unification of primitive types and their corresponding object types—something that you’ll see as problematic in the next sections.
The main difficulty for Java is backward compatibility, both in the JVM and in existing programs that use reflection and expect generics to be erased.
Generics proved a wonderful feature when added to Java 5
They’re also fine for expressing the type of many Java 8 lambdas and method references.
In essence, Java 8 lambdas have enriched what you can write, but the type system hasn’t kept up with the flexibility of the code.
In many functional languages, you can write, for example, the BiFunction, Supplier, and the like.
A simple extension to Java syntax for types would allow this, resulting in more readable types analogously to what Scala provides, as discussed in chapter 15
In Java all primitive types (int, for example) have a corresponding object type (here has the laudable aim of increasing runtime efficiency, the types can become confusing.
Predicate<Apple> is therefore more efficient because it avoids boxing the boolean to make a Boolean.
This issue has led to the creation of multiple, similar interfaces such as LongToIntFunction and BooleanSupplier, which add further conceptual overload.
The special cases of Function such as Supplier<T>, ramifications caused by the distinction between primitive and object types.
We discussed earlier how reified generics could address many of these issues.
Some expert readers may have been a little upset when we said that Java 8 has three forms of values:
What we’re leading up to is this: given that functional-style programming puts a strong emphasis on not mutating existing structure, there’s a strong argument for a keyword such as transitively_final, which can qualify fields of reference type and which ensures that no modification can take place to the field nor to any object directly or indirectly accessible via that field.
Such types represent one intuition about values: values are immutable, and only variables (which contain values) may be mutated to contain a different immutable value.
As we remarked at the head of this section, Java authors including ourselves sometimes have inconsistently talked about the possibility of a Java value being a mutable array.
In the next section, we return to proper intuition and discuss the idea of a value type; these can only contain immutable values, even if variables of value type can still be updated, unless qualified with final.
In this section, we discuss the difference between primitive types and object types, linking into the discussion earlier about the desire for value types, which help you to write programs functionally, just as object types are necessary for object-oriented programming.
Many of the issues we discuss are interrelated, so there’s no easy way to explain one problem in isolation.
Given all the implicit boxing and unboxing that Java has slowly acquired since Java 1.1, you might ask whether it’s time for Java to treat, for example, Integer and int identically and to rely on the Java compiler to optimize into the best form for the JVM.
This would be a wonderful idea in principle, but let’s consider the problems surrounding adding the type Complex to Java to see why boxing is problematic.
The type Complex, which models so-called complex numbers having real and imaginary parts, is naturally introduced as follows:
But values of type Complex are reference types, and every operation on Complex needs to do an object allocation—dwarfing the cost of the two additions in add.
What we need is a primitive-type analog of Complex, perhaps called complex.
Note that on primitives, the identity comparison does bitwise comparison but on objects it does reference equality.
So often, we accidentally create a new distinct Double object, which the compiler needs to respect because the semantics of Object, from which Double inherits, require this.
You’ve seen this discussion before, both in the earlier discussion of value types and in chapter 14, where we discussed referential transparency of methods that functionally update persistent data structures.
There are two forms of values: those of Object type that have.
There are also value types, which are immutable and which don’t have reference identity; primitive types are a subset of this wider notion.
We could then allow user-defined value types (perhaps starting with a lowercase letter to emphasize their similarity to primitive types such as comparison in the same way that hardware comparison on int performs a bit-by-bit comparison.
You can see this being overridden for floating-point comparison, which performs a somewhat more sophisticated operation.
The type Complex would be a perfect example of a non-primitive value type; such types resemble C# structs.
In addition, value types can reduce storage requirements because they don’t have reference identity.
The left diagram shows a typical storage requirement when Pair and Complex are Objects and the right shows the better layout when Pair and Complex are value types (note that we called them pair and complex in lowercase in the diagram to emphasize their similarity to primitive types)
Note also that value types are also likely to give better performance, not only for data access (multiple levels of pointer indirection replaced with a single indexed-addressing instruction) but also for hardware cache utilization (due to data contiguity)
Note that because value types don’t have reference identity, the compiler can then box and unbox them at its choice.
If you pass a complex as argument from one function to another, then the compiler can naturally pass it as two separate doubles.
Returning it without boxing is trickier in the JVM, of course, because the JVM only provides method-return instructions passing values representable in a 64-bit machine register.) But if you pass a larger value type as an argument (perhaps a large immutable array), then the compiler can instead, transparently to.
To learn about the syntax and usage of structs and the differences between classes and structs,
Structs may seem similar to classes, but there are important differences that you should be aware of.
First of all, classes are [C#] reference types and structs are value types.
We’d like to have value types in Java, because functional-style programs deal with immutable values that don’t have identity.
We’d like to see primitive types as a special case of value types, but the erasure model of generics, which Java currently has, means that value types can’t be used with generics without boxing.
Object (boxed) versions (for example, Integer) of primitive types (for example, int) continue to be vital for collections and Java generics because of their erasure model, but now their inheriting Object (and hence reference equality) is seen as a drawback.
Addressing any one of these problems means addressing them all.
In this chapter we also looked at pressures for further Java evolution.
We hope you’ve enjoyed the adventure that is Java 8, and that we’ve sparked your interests in exploring functional programming and in the further evolution of Java.
Miscellaneous language updates In this appendix, we discuss three other language updates in Java 8: repeated annotations, type annotations, and generalized target-type inference.
We don’t discuss JDK 8 updates such as Nashorn and Compact Profiles because they’re new JVM features.
We invite you to read the following links if you’re interested in Nashorn and Compact Profiles: http://openjdk.java.net/projects/nashorn/ and http://openjdk.java.net/jeps/161
The annotation mechanism in Java 8 has been enhanced in two ways:
Before we explain these updates, it’s worth quickly refreshing what you could do with annotations before Java 8
Annotations in Java are a mechanism that lets you decorate program elements with additional information (note that prior to Java 8 only declarations could be annotated)
In the context of JUnit, annotations can differentiate methods that should be run as a unit test and methods that are used for setup work.
For instance, the @Deprecated annotation is used to indicate that a method should no longer be used.
The Java compiler can also process annotations in order to detect errors, suppress warnings, or generate code.
Annotations are popular in Java EE, where they’re used to configure enterprise applications.
Previous versions of Java forbid more than one annotation of a given annotation type to be specified on a declaration.
Java EE programmers often make use of an idiom to circumvent this restriction.
You declare a new annotation, which contains an array of the annotation you want to repeat.
The nested annotation on the Book class is pretty ugly.
This is why Java 8 essentially removes this restriction, which tidies things a bit.
You’re now allowed to specify multiple annotations of the same annotation type on a declaration, provided they stipulate that the annotation is repeatable.
It’s not the default behavior; you have to explicitly ask for an annotation to be repeatable.
If an annotation has been designed to be repeatable, you can just use it.
But if you’re providing annotations for your users, then setup is required to specify that an annotation can be repeated.
As a result, the Book class can be annotated with multiple @Author annotations:
Annotations are still wrapped in a container to ensure behavioral compatibility with legacy reflection methods.
The method getAnnotation(Class<T> annotationClass) in the Java API returns the annotation of type T for an annotated element.
Which annotation should this method return if there are several annotations of type T?
Without diving into too much detail, the class Class supports a new get-AnnotationsByType method that facilitates working with repeatable annotations.
For example, you can use it as follows to print all the Author annotations on the Book class:
For this to work, both the repeatable annotation and its container must have a RUNTIME retention policy.
More information about compatibility with legacy reflection methods can be found here: http://cr.openjdk.java.net/~abuckley/8misc.pdf.
As of Java 8, annotations can be also applied to any type uses.
This includes the new operator, type casts, instanceof checks, generic type arguments, and implements and throws clauses.
Here we indicate that the variable name of type String can’t be null using a @NonNull annotation:
Similarly, you can annotate the type of the elements in a list:
Why is this interesting? Annotations on types can be useful to perform program analysis.
In these two examples, a tool could ensure that getName doesn’t return null and that the elements of the list of cars are always non-null.
Java 8 doesn’t provide official annotations or a tool to use them out of the box.
It provides only the ability to use annotations on types.
Luckily, a tool called the Checker framework exists, which defines several type annotations and lets you enhance type checking using them.
If you’re curious, we invite you to take a look at its tutorial: http://www.checker-framework.org.
More information about where you can use annotations in your code can be found here: http://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se8/html/jls-9.html#jls-9.7.4
You’re already familiar with type inference using context information before Java 8
For example, the method empty-List in Java is defined as follows:
The method emptyList is parameterized with the type parameter T.
You can call it as follows to provide an explicit type to the type parameter:
Before Java 8, this inference mechanism based on the context (that is, target typing) was limited.
To fix it you’d have to provide an explicit type argument like the one we showed previously.
In Java 8 the target type includes arguments to a method, so you don’t need to provide an explicit generic argument:
Miscellaneous library updates This appendix reviews the main additions to the Java library.
The biggest update to the Collections API is the introduction of streams, which we discussed in chapters 4–6
There are also other updates, which we briefly review in this appendix.
The Java API designers made the most out of default methods and added several new methods to collection interfaces and classes.
Map getOrDefault, forEach, compute, computeIfAbsent, computeIfPresent, merge, putIfAbsent, remove(key, value), replace, replaceAll.
The Map interface is the most updated interface, with support for several new convenient methods.
For example, the method getOrDefault can be used to replace an existing idiom that.
If not, you can provide a default value to return instead.
For example, if the key is explicitly mapped to the value null, then no default value will be returned.
Another particularly useful method is computeIfAbsent, which we briefly mentioned in chapter 14 when explaining memoization.
Let’s say that you need to fetch and process data from different websites.
In such a scenario, it’s useful to cache the data, so you don’t have to execute the (expensive) fetching operation multiple times:
You can now write this code more concisely by using computeIfAbsent as follows:
A description of all other methods can be found in the official Java API documentation.[1] Note that ConcurrentHashMap was also updated with additional methods.
The removeIf method can be used to remove all elements in a collection that match a predicate.
Note that this is different than the filter method included in the Streams API.
The filter method in the Streams API produces a new stream; it doesn’t mutate the current stream or source.
The replaceAll method replaces each element in a List with the result of applying a given operator to it.
It’s similar to the map method in a stream, but it mutates the elements of the List.
The Collections class has been around for a long time to operate on or return collections.
It now includes additional methods to return unmodifiable, synchronized, checked, and empty NavigableMap and NavigableSet.
In addition, it includes the method checkedQueue, which returns a view of Queue that’s extended with dynamic type checking.
You used the Comparator.comparing static method in chapter 3 to return a Comparator object given a function that extracts the sorting key.
The first is, of course, the introduction of parallel streams, which we explore in chapter 7
There’s also the introduction of the CompletableFuture class, which you can learn about in chapter 11
In this section, we look at updates in the java.util.concurrent.atomic package, which deals with atomic variables.
In addition, we discuss updates to the Concurrent-HashMap class, which supports several new methods.
The java.util.concurrent.atomic package offers several numeric classes, such as AtomicInteger and AtomicLong that support atomic operation on single variables.
Here’s how to atomically set the minimum between an observed value of 10 and an existing atomic integer:
The Java API recommends using the new classes LongAdder, LongAccumulator, Double-Adder, and DoubleAccumulator instead of the Atomic classes equivalent when multiple threads update frequently but read less frequently (for example, in the context of statistics)
These classes are designed to grow dynamically to reduce thread contention.
The classes LongAdder and DoubleAdder support operations for additions, whereas LongAccumulator and DoubleAccumulator are given a function to combine values.
For example, to calculate the sum of several values, you can use a LongAdder as follows.
The ConcurrentHashMap class was introduced to provide a more modern HashMap, which is concurrent friendly.
ConcurrentHashMap allows concurrent add and updates that lock only certain parts of the internal data structure.
Thus, read and write operations have improved performance compared to the synchronized Hashtable alternative.
Entries of a map are typically stored in buckets accessed by the generated hashcode of the key.
But if many keys return the same hashcode, performance will deteriorate because buckets are implemented as Lists with O(n) retrieval.
In Java 8, when the buckets become too big, they’re dynamically replaced with sorted trees, which have O(log(n)) retrieval.
Note that this is possible only when the keys are Comparable (for example, String or Number classes)
ConcurrentHashMap supports three new kinds of operations reminiscent of what you saw with streams:
Each kind of operation supports four forms, accepting functions with keys, values, Map.Entry, and (key, value) arguments:
Note that these operations don’t lock the state of the ConcurrentHashMap.
The functions supplied to these operations shouldn’t depend on any ordering or on any other objects or values that may change while computation is in progress.
In addition, you need to specify a parallelism threshold for all these operations.
The operations will execute sequentially if the current map size is estimated to be less than the given threshold.
Using a value of 1 enables maximal parallelism using the common thread pool.
Using a value of Long.MAX_VALUE runs the operation on a single thread.
In this example we use the method reduceValues to find the maximum value in the map:
Note that there are primitive specializations for int, long, and double for each reduce operation (for example, reduceValuesToInt, reduceKeysToLong, and so on)
The ConcurrentHashMap class provides a new method called mappingCount, which returns the number of mappings in the map as a long.
It should be used instead of the method size, which returns an int.
This is because the number of mappings may not fit in an int.
The ConcurrentHashMap class provides a new method called keySet that returns a view of the ConcurrentHashMap as a Set (changes to the map are reflected in the Set and vice versa)
You can also create a Set backed by a ConcurrentHashMap using the new static method newKeySet.
The Arrays class provides various static methods to manipulate arrays.
It now includes four new methods (which have primitive specialized overloaded variants)
The parallelSort method sorts the specified array in parallel, using a natural order, or using an extra Comparator for an array of objects.
The setAll and parallelSetAll methods set all elements of the specified array, respectively sequentially or in parallel, using the provided function to compute each element.
The function receives the element index and returns a value for that index.
The parallelPrefix method cumulates, in parallel, each element of the given array, using the supplied binary operator.
The Java 8 API enhances the Number and Math classes with new methods.
The new methods of the Number class are as follows:
The Short, Integer, Long, Float, and Double classes include the sum, min, and max static methods.
You saw these methods in conjunction with the reduce operation in chapter 5
The Integer and Long classes include the methods compareUnsigned, divideUnsigned, remainderUnsigned, and toUnsignedString to work with unsigned values.
The Integer and Long classes also respectively include the static methods parse-UnsignedInt and parseUnsignedLong, to parse strings as an unsigned int or long.
The Byte and Short classes include the methods toUnsignedInt and toUnsigned-Long, to convert the argument to an int or long by an unsigned conversion.
Similarly, the Integer class now includes the static method toUnsignedLong.
The Double and Float classes include the static method isFinite, to check whether the argument is a finite floating-point value.
The Boolean class now includes the static methods logicalAnd, logicalOr, and logicalXor, to apply the and, or, and xor operations between two booleans.
The BigInteger class includes the methods byteValueExact, shortValueExact, intValueExact, and longValueExact, to convert this BigInteger to the respective primitive type.
But it throws an arithmetic exception if there’s a loss of information during the conversion.
The Math class includes new methods that throw an arithmetic exception if the result of the operation overflows.
These methods consist of addExact, subtractExact, multiply-Exact, incrementExact, decrementExact, and negateExact with int and long arguments.
In addition, there’s a static toIntExact method to convert a long value to an int.
Other additions include the static methods floorMod, floorDiv, and nextDown.
Noticeable additions to the Files class let you produce a stream from files.
We mentioned the new static method Files.lines in chapter 5; it lets you read a file lazily as a stream.
Other useful static methods that return a stream include the following:
Because the stream is consumed lazily, it’s a useful method for processing potentially very large directories.
But the listing is recursive and the depth level can be configured.
We discussed several changes to the annotation mechanism in Java 8 in appendix A.
Another addition to the Reflection API is that information about parameters of methods such as names and modifiers can now be accessed with the help of the new java.lang.reflect.Parameter class, which is referenced in the new java.lang .reflect.Executable class that serves as a shared superclass for the common functionality of Method and Constructor.
One of the biggest limitations of a Java 8 stream is that you can operate on it only once and get only one result while processing it.
Indeed, if you try to traverse a stream for a second time, the only thing you can achieve is an exception like this:
Despite this, there are situations where you’d like to get several results when processing a single stream.
For instance, you may want to parse a log file in a stream, as we did in section 5.7.3, but gather multiple statistics in a single step.
Or, keeping with the menu data model used to explain Stream’s features in chapters 4–6, you may want to retrieve different information while traversing the stream of dishes.
In other words, you’d like to push a stream through more than one lambda on a single pass, and to do this you need a type of fork method and to apply different functions to each forked stream.
Even better, it would be great if you could perform those operations in parallel, using different threads to calculate the different required results.
Paul Sandoz in the email he sent to the lambda-dev mailing list: http://mail.openjdk.java.net/pipermail/lambda-dev/2013-November/011516.html.
The first thing necessary to execute multiple operations in parallel on a stream is to create a StreamForker that wraps the original stream, on which you can define the different operations you want to perform.
Defining a StreamForker to execute multiple operations on a stream.
A Function, which transforms the stream into a result of any type representing one of these operations.
A key, which will allow you to retrieve the result of that operation and accumulates these key/function pairs in an internalMap.
The fork method returns the StreamForker itself; therefore, you can build a pipeline by forking several operations.
Here the user defines three operations to be performed on a stream indexed by three keys.
The StreamForker then traverses the original stream and forks it into three other streams.
At this point the three operations can be applied in parallel on the forked streams, and the results of these function applications, indexed with their corresponding keys, are used to populate the resulting Map.
The execution of all the operations added through the fork method is triggered by the invocation of the method getResults, which returns an implementation of the Results interface defined as follows:
This interface has only one method to which you can pass one of the key Objects used in one of the fork methods, and that method returns the result of the operation corresponding to that key.
The ForkingStreamConsumer implements both the Results interface defined previously and the Consumer interface.
As you’ll see when we analyze its implementation in more detail, its main task is to consume all the elements in the stream and multiplex them to a number of BlockingQueues equal to the number of operations submitted via the fork method.
Note that it is ensured that the stream is sequential, because if the method forEach were performed on a parallel stream, its elements could be pushed to the queues out of order.
The finish method adds special elements to those queues to signal that there are no more items to be processed.
The build method used to create the ForkingStreamConsumer is shown in the next listing.
In listing C.2, you first create the List of BlockingQueues mentioned previously.
Then you create a Map, having as keys the same keys used to identify the different operations to be executed on the stream, and having as values the Futures that will contain the corresponding results of these operations.
The List of BlockingQueues and the Map of Futures are then passed to the constructor of the ForkingStreamConsumer.
Each Future is created with this getOperationResult method, as shown in the next listing.
The method getOperationResult creates a new BlockingQueue and adds it to the List of queues.
This queue is passed to a new BlockingQueueSpliterator, which is a late-binding Spliterator, reading the item to be traversed from the queue; we’ll examine how it’s made shortly.
You then create a sequential stream traversing this Spliterator, and finally you create a Future to calculate the result of applying the function representing one of the operations you want to perform on this stream.
This Future is created using a static factory method of the CompletableFuture class that implements the Future interface.
The last two outstanding parts you need to develop are the ForkingStreamConsumer and BlockingQueueSpliterator classes we introduced previously.
This class implements both the Consumer and Results interfaces and holds a reference to the List of BlockingQueues and to the Map of Futures executing the different operations on the stream.
The Consumer interface requires an implementation for the method accept.
Here, every time ForkingStreamConsumer accepts an element of the stream, it adds that element to all the BlockingQueues.
Also, after all the elements of the original stream have been added to all queues, the finish method causes one last item to be added to all of them.
This item, when met by BlockingQueueSpliterators, will make the queues understand that there are no more elements to be processed.
The Results interface requires an implementation for the get method.
Here, it retrieves the Future that’s indexed in the Map with the argument key and unwraps its result or waits until a result is available.
Finally, there will be a BlockingQueueSpliterator for each operation to be performed on the stream.
Each BlockingQueueSpliterator will have a reference to one of the BlockingQueues populated by the ForkingStreamConsumer, and it can be implemented as shown in the following listing.
A Spliterator reading the elements it traverses from a BlockingQueue.
In this listing a Spliterator is implemented, not to define the policy of how to split a stream but only to use its late-binding capability.
Also, it’s impossible to return any meaningful value from the estimatedSize method because you can’t foresee how many elements can be still taken from the queue.
Further, because you’re not attempting any split, this estimation will be useless.
The only method implemented here is tryAdvance, which waits to take from its BlockingQueue the elements of the original stream added to it by the ForkingStreamConsumer.
It sends those elements to a Consumer that (based on how this Spliterator was created in the getOperationResult method) is the source of a further stream (on which the corresponding function, passed to one of the fork method invocations, has to be applied)
The tryAdvance method returns true, to notify its invoker that there are other elements to be consumed, until it finds on the queue the special Object added by ForkingStreamConsumer to signal that there are no more elements to be taken from the queue.
Figure C.2 shows an overview of the StreamForker and its building blocks.
In the figure, the StreamForker in the upper left has a Map, where each operation to be performed on the stream, defined by a function, is indexed by a key.
The ForkingStreamConsumer on the right holds a queue for each of these operations and consumes all the elements in the original stream, multiplexing them to all the queues.
At the bottom of the figure, each queue has a BlockingQueueSpliterator pulling its items and acting as a source for a different stream.
Finally, each of these streams, forked by the original one, is passed as argument to one of the functions, thus executing one of the operations to be performed.
You now have all the components of your StreamForker, so it’s ready to use.
Let’s put the StreamForker to work on the menu data model that we defined in chapter 4, by forking the original stream of dishes to perform four different operations in parallel on it, as shown in the next listing.
In particular, you want to generate a comma-separated list of the names of all available dishes, calculate the total calories of the menu, find the dish with the most calories, and group all dishes by their type.
The StreamForker provides a convenient, fluent API to fork a stream and assign a different operation to each forked stream.
These operations are expressed in terms of functions applied on the stream and can be identified by any arbitrary object; in this case we’ve chosen to use Strings.
When you have no more forks to add, you can invoke getResults on the StreamForker to trigger the execution of all the defined operations and obtain StreamForker.Results.
Because these operations are internally performed asynchronously, the getResults method returns immediately, without waiting for all the results to be available.
You can obtain the result of a specific operation by passing the key used to identify it to the StreamForker.Results interface.
If in the meantime the computation of that operation completes, the get method will return the corresponding result; otherwise, it will block until such a result isn’t available.
As expected, this piece of code generates the following output:
Short menu: pork, beef, chicken, french fries, rice, season fruit, pizza, prawns, salmon Total calories: 4300 Most caloric dish: pork.
For performance reasons you shouldn’t take for granted that this approach is more efficient than traversing the stream several times.
The overhead caused by the use of the blocking queues can easily outweigh the advantages of executing the different operations in parallel when the stream is made of data that’s all in memory.
This example demonstrates how it can be possible to execute multiple operations on the same stream in one shot.
More importantly, we believe this proves that even when a specific feature isn’t provided by the native Java API, the flexibility of lambda expressions and a bit of creativity in reusing and combining what’s already available can let you implement the missing feature on your own.
Lambdas and JVM bytecode You may wonder how the Java compiler implements lambda expressions and how the Java virtual machine (JVM) deals with them.
If you think lambda expressions can simply be translated to anonymous classes, you should read on.
This appendix briefly discusses how lambda expressions are compiled, by examining the generated class files.
We showed in chapter 2 that anonymous classes can be used to declare and instantiate a class at the same time.
As a result, just like lambda expressions, they can be used to provide the implementation for a functional interface.
Because a lambda expression provides the implementation for the abstract method of a functional interface, it would seem straightforward to ask the Java compiler to translate a lambda expression into an anonymous class during the compilation process.
But anonymous classes have some undesirable characteristics that impact the performance of applications:
The compiler generates a new class file for each anonymous class.
The filename usually looks like ClassName$1, where ClassName is the name of the class in which the anonymous class appears, followed by a dollar sign and a number.
The generation of many class files is undesirable, because each class file needs to be loaded and verified before being used, which impacts the startup performance of the application.
If lambdas were translated to anonymous classes, you’d have one new class file for each lambda.
Each new anonymous class introduces a new subtype for a class or interface.
If you had a hundred different lambdas for expressing a Comparator, that would mean a hundred different subtypes of Comparator.
In certain situations, this can make it harder to improve runtime performance by the JVM.
A Java source file is compiled to Java bytecode by the Java compiler.
The JVM can then execute the generated bytecode and run the application.
Anonymous classes and lambda expressions use different bytecode instructions when they’re compiled.
You can inspect the bytecode and constant pool of any class file using the command.
Let’s try to implement an instance of the Function interface using the old Java 7 syntax, as an anonymous inner class, as shown in the following listing.
Doing this, the corresponding generated bytecode for the Function created as an anonymous inner class will be something along the lines of this:
An object of type InnerClass$1 is instantiated using the bytecode operation new.
A reference to the newly created object is pushed on the stack at the same time.
This value then gets consumed by the instruction invokespecial, which initializes the object.
The top of the stack now still contains a reference to the object, which is stored in the f1 field of the.
InnerClass$1 is the name generated by the compiler for the anonymous class.
If you want to reassure yourself, you can inspect the InnerClass$1 class file as well, and you’ll find the code for the implementation of the Function interface:
Now let’s try to do the same using the new Java 8 syntax as a lambda expression.
Inspect the generated class file of the code in the following listing.
We explained the drawbacks in translating a lambda expression in an anonymous inner class, and indeed you can see that the result is very different.
The creation of an extra class has been replaced with an invokedynamic instruction.
The bytecode instruction invokedynamic was introduced in JDK7 to support dynamically typed languages on the JVM.
The typical use for this instruction is something like the following:
Here the types of a and b aren’t known at compile time and can change from time to time.
For this reason, when the JVM executes an invokedynamic for the first time, it consults a bootstrap method, implementing the language-dependent logic that determines the actual method to be called.
There’s a good chance that if the add method is called with two ints, the subsequent call will also be with two ints.
As a result, it’s not necessary to rediscover the method to be called at each invocation.
The call site itself can contain the logic defining under which conditions it needs to be relinked.
In listing D.2, the features of the invokedynamic instruction have been used for a slightly different purpose than the one for which they were originally introduced.
In fact, here it’s used to delay the strategy used to translate lambda expressions in bytecode until runtime.
In other words, using invokedynamic in this way allows deferring code generation for implementing the lambda expression until runtime.
The strategy used to translate the lambda expression body to bytecode becomes a pure implementation detail.
It could also be changed dynamically, or optimized and modified in future JVM implementations, preserving the bytecode’s backward compatibility.
There’s no overhead, such as additional fields or static initializer, if the lambda is never used.
For stateless (noncapturing) lambdas it’s possible to create one instance of the lambda object, cache it,
This is a common use case, and people were used to doing this explicitly before Java 8; for example, declaring a specific Comparator instance in a static final variable.
There’s no additional performance cost because this translation has to be performed, and its result linked, only when the lambda is invoked for the first time.
All subsequent invocations can skip this slow path and call the formerly linked implementation.
A lambda expression is translated into bytecode by putting its body into one of a static method created at runtime.
A stateless lambda, one that captures no state from its enclosing scope, like the one we defined in listing D.2, is the simplest type of lambda to be translated.
In this case the compiler can generate a method having the same signature of the lambda expression, so the result of this translation process can be logically seen as follows:
The case of a lambda expression capturing final (or effectively final) local variables or fields, as in the following example, is a bit more complex:
In this case the signature of the generated method can’t be the same as the lambda expression, because it’s necessary to add extra arguments to carry the additional state of the enclosed context.
The simplest solution to achieve this is to prepend the arguments of the lambda expression with an additional argument for each of the captured variables, so the method generated to implement the former lambda expression will be something like this:
More information about the translation process for lambda expressions can be found here: http://cr.openjdk.java.net/~briangoetz/lambda/lambda-translation.html.
IntelliJ intermediate operations, 2nd internal iteration characteristics of streams external iteration vs.
Nashorn naturalOrder method NavigableMap class NavigableSet class negate method negated method negateExact method NetBeans next method nextDown method nextOrSame method NIO API non-blocking code defined making asynchronous requests overview scaling and using custom Executor using parallel stream noneMatch method, 2nd NONNULL characteristic non-strict evaluation now method NullPointerException nullsFirst method nullsLast method.
UnaryOperator interface unbounded unboxing unit testing lambda expressions unmodifiable collections UnsupportedTemporalType-Exception unwrapping optionals updateAndGet method.
