Java(TM) Network Programming and Distributed Computing is an accessible introduction to the changing face of networking theory, Java(TM) technology, and the fundamental elements of the Java networking API.
With the explosive growth of the Internet, Web applications, and Web services, the majority of today's programs and applications require some form of networking.
Because it was created with extensive networking features, the Java programming language is uniquely suited for network programming and distributed computing.
Whether you are a Java devotee who needs a solid working knowledge of network programming or a network programmer needing to apply your existing skills to Java, this how-to guide is the one book you will want to keep close at hand.
You will learn the basic concepts involved with networking and the practical application of the skills necessary to be an effective Java network programmer.
An accelerated guide to networking API, Java(TM) Network Programming and Distributed Computing also serves as a comprehensive, example-rich reference.
You will learn to maximize the API structure through in-depth coverage of:
This book's coverage of advanced topics such as input/output streaming and multithreading allows even the most experienced Java developers to sharpen their skills.
Java(TM) Network Programming and Distributed Computing will get you up-to-speed with network programming today; helping you employ innovative techniques in your own software development projects.
Copyright Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks.
Where those designations appear in this book and Addison-Wesley was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in initial caps or all caps.
The authors and publisher have taken care in the preparation of this book, but make no expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assume no responsibility for errors or omissions.
No liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of the use of the information or programs contained herein.
The publisher offers discounts on this book when ordered in quantity for special sales.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior consent of the publisher.
For information on obtaining permission for use of material from this work, please submit a written request to:
To the memory of Countess Ada Lovelace, the world's first computer programmer, and to Myrtle Irene Daley, my beloved grandmother.
A gracious thanks goes out to two former instructors, Mr.
Zheng da Wu, whose encouragement and faith in writing and networking, respectively, guided me to what I am today.
The goal of this book is to introduce and explain the basic concepts of networking and discuss the practical aspects of Java network programming.
This book will help readers get up to speed with network programming and employ the techniques learned in software development.
If you've had some networking experience in another language and want to apply your existing skills to Java, you'll find the book to be an accelerated guide and a comprehensive reference to the networking API.
This book does not require you to be a networking guru, however, as Chapters 1–4 provide a gentle introduction to networking theory, Java, and the most basic elements of the Java networking API.
In later chapters, the Java API is covered in greater detail, with a discussion supplementing the documentation that Sun Microsystems provides as a reference.
In this book, readers will learn how to write applications in Java that make use of network programming.
The Java API provides many ways to communicate over the Internet, from sending packets and streams of data to employing higher-level application protocols such as HTTP and distributed computing mechanisms.
How the Internet works, its architecture and the TCP/IP protocol stack • The Java programming language, including a refresher course on topics such as exception.
Transport Control Protocol (TCP) • The advantages of multi-threaded applications, which allow network applications to.
How to write server-side Java applications for the WWW • Distributed computing technologies including remote method invocation (RMI) and.
A reasonable familiarity with Java programming is required to get the most out of this book.
You'll need to be able to compile and run Java applications and to understand basic concepts such as classes, objects, and the Java API.
However, you don't need to be an expert with respect to the more advanced topics covered herein, such as I/O streams and multi-threading.
All examples use a text interface, so there's no need to have GUI experience.
You'll also need to install the Java SDK, available for free from Sun Microsystems (http://java.sun.com/j2se/)
A minimal amount of additional software is required, and most of the tools for Java programming are available for free and downloadable via the WWW.
Chapter 2 includes an overview of Java development tools, but readers can also use their existing code editor.
Readers will be advised when examples feature additional Sun Microsystems software.
As a companion to the material covered in this book, the book's Web site offers the source code in downloadable form (no need to wear out your fingers!), as well as a list of Frequently Asked Questions about Java Networking, links to networking resources, and additional information about the book.
We welcome feedback from readers, be it comments on specific chapters or sections or an evaluation of the book as a whole.
In particular, reader input about whether topics were clearly conveyed and sufficiently comprehensive would be appreciated.
While we'd love to receive only praise, honest opinions are valued (as well as suggestions about coverage of new networking topics)
While we can't guarantee an individual reply, we'll do our best to respond to your query.
We'd like to make special mention of two reviewers who contributed detailed reviews and offered insightful recommendations: Howard Lee Harkness and D.
Most of all, we would like to thank Amy Fong, whose thoroughness and invaluable suggestions, including questions that the inquisitive reader might have about TCP/IP and Java, helped shape the book that you are reading today.
We'd also like to thank our editorial team at Addison-Wesley, including Karen Gettman, whose initial encouragement and persistence convinced us to take on the project, Mary Hart, Marcy Barnes-Henrie, Melissa Dobson, and Emily Frey.
Their support throughout the process of writing, editing, and preparing this book for publication is most heartily appreciated.
Networking Theory This chapter provides an overview of the basic concepts of networking and discusses essential topics of networking theory.
Readers experienced with networking may choose to skip over some of these preliminary sections, although a refresher course on basic networking concepts will be useful, as later chapters presume a knowledge of this theory on the part of the reader.
A solid understanding of the relationship between the various protocols that make up the TCP/IP suite is required for network programming.
Put simply, a network is a collection of devices that share a common communication protocol and a common communication medium (such as network cables, dial-up connections, and wireless links)
We use the term devices in this definition rather than computers, even though most people think of a network as being a collection of computers; certainly the basic concept of a network in most peoples' mind is of an assembly of network servers and desktop machines.
However, to say that networks are merely a collection of computers is to limit the range of hardware that can use them.
For example, printers may be shared across a network, allowing more than one machine to gain access to their services.
Other types of devices can also be connected to a network; these devices can provide access to information, or offer services that may be controlled remotely.
Indeed, there is a growing movement toward connecting noncomputing devices to networks.
While the technology is still evolving, we're moving toward a networkcentric as opposed to a computing-centric model.
Services and devices can be distributed across a network rather than being bound to individual machines.
In the same way, users can move from machine to machine, logging on as if they were sitting at their own familiar terminal.
One fun and popular example from very early on in the history of networking is the soda machine connected to the Internet, allowing people around the world to see how many cans of a certain flavor of drink were available.
While a trivial application, it served to demonstrate the power of networking devices.
Indeed, as home networks become easier to use and more affordable, we may even see regular household appliances such as telephones, televisions, and home stereo systems connected to local networks or even to the Internet.
Network and software standards such as Sun's Jini already exist to help devices and hardware talk to each other over networks and to allow instant plug-and-play functionality.
Devices and services can be added and removed from the network (as, for example, when you unplug your printer and take it to the next room) without the need for complex administration and configuration.
It is anticipated that over the course of the next few years, users will become just as comfortable and familiar with network-centric computing as they are with the Internet.
In addition to devices that provide services are devices that keep the network going.
Depending on the complexity of a network and its physical architecture, elements forming it may include network cards, routers, hubs, and gateways.
Network cards are hardware devices added to a computer to allow it to talk to a network.
The most common network card in use today is the Ethernet card.
Network cards usually connect to a network cable, which is the link to the network and the medium through which data is transmitted.
However, other media exist, such as dial-up connections through a phone line, and wireless links.
These machines direct packets of data to the next "hop" in their journey across a network.
Hubs provide connections that allow multiple computers to access a network (for example, allowing two desktop machines to access a local area network)
Gateways connect one network to another—for example, a local area network to the Internet.
While routers and gateways are similar, a router does not have to bridge multiple networks.
While it is useful to understand such networking terminology as it is widely used in networking texts and protocol specifications, programmers do not generally need to be concerned with the implementation details of a network and its underlying architecture.
However, it is important for programmers to be aware of the various elements making up the network.
These connections are most commonly physical connections, such as wires and cables, through which electricity is sent.
For example, it is possible to use infrared and radio as a communication medium for transmitting data wirelessly, or fiber-optic cables that use light rather than electricity.
Such connections carry data between one point in the network and another.
This data is represented as bits of information (either "on" or "off," a "zero" or a "one")
Whether through a physical medium such as a cable, through the air, or using light, this raw data is passed across various points in the network called nodes; a node could represent a computer, another type of hardware device such as a printer, or a piece of networking equipment that relays this information onward to other nodes in the network or to an entirely different network.
Of course, for data to be successfully delivered to individual nodes, these nodes must be clearly identifiable.
Each node in a network is typically represented by an address, just as a street name and number, town or city, and zip code identifies individual homes and offices.
The manufacturer of the network interface card (NIC) installed in such devices is responsible for ensuring that no two card addresses are alike, and chooses a suitable addressing scheme.
Each card will have this address stored permanently, so that it remains fixed—it cannot be manually assigned or modified, although some operating systems will allow these addresses to be faked in the event of an accidental conflict with another card's address.
Because of the wide variety of NICs, many addressing schemes are used.
For example, Ethernet network cards are assigned a unique 48-bit number to distinguish one card from another.
Usually, a numerical number is assigned to each card, and manufacturers are allocated batches of numbers.
This system must be strictly regulated by industry, of course—two cards with the same address would cause headaches for network administrators.
The physical address is referred to by many names (some of which are specific to a certain type of card, while others are general terms), including:
These addresses are used to send information to the appropriate node.
If two nodes shared the same address, they would be competing for the same information and one would inevitably lose out, or both would receive the same data.
Often, machines are known by more than one type of.
A network server may have a physical Ethernet address as well as an Internet Protocol (IP) address that distinguishes it from other hosts on the Internet, or it may have more than one network card.
Within a local area network, machines can use physical addresses to communicate.
However, since there are many types of these addresses, they are not appropriate for internetwork communication.
As discussed later in this chapter, the IP address is used for this purpose.
Sending individual bits of data from node to node is not very cost effective, as a fair bit of overhead is involved in relaying the necessary address information every time a byte of data is transmitted.
Packets consist of a header and data segment, as shown in Figure 1-1
The header contains addressing information (such as the sender and the recipient), checksums to ensure that a packet has not been corrupted, as well as other useful information that is needed for transmission across the network.
The data segment contains sequences of bytes, comprising the actual data being sent from one node to another.
Since the header information is needed only for transmission, applications are interested only in the data segment.
Ideally, as much data as possible would be combined into a packet, in order to minimize the overhead of the headers.
However, if information needs to be sent quickly, packets may be dispatched when nearly empty.
Depending on the type of packet and protocol being used, packets may also be padded out to fit a fixed length of bytes.
When a node on the network is ready to transmit a packet, a direct connection to the destination node is usually not available.
Instead, intermediary nodes carry packets from one location to another, and this process is repeated indefinitely until the packet reaches its destination.
Due to network conditions (such as congestion or network failures), packets may take arbitrary routes, and sometimes they may be lost in transit or arrive out of sequence.
This may seem like a chaotic way of communicating, but as will be seen in later chapters, there are ways to guarantee delivery and sequencing.
Indeed, the properties of guaranteed delivery and sequential order are often irrelevant to certain types of applications (such as streaming video and audio, where it is more these properties are necessary, networking software can keep track of lost packets and out-ofsequence data for applications.
Packet transmission and transmission of raw bits of information are low-level processes, while most network programming deals with high-level transmission of data.
Rather than simultaneously covering the gamut of transmission from raw bytes to packets and then to actual program data, it is helpful to conceive of these different types of communication as comprising individual layers.
The concept of layers was introduced to acknowledge and address the complexity of networking theory.
The most popular approach to network layering is the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model, created by the International Standards Organization (ISO)
This model groups network operations into seven parts, from the most basic physical layer through to the application layer, where software applications such as Web clients and e-mail servers communicate.
Under the OSI model, each of the seven layers into which communication is grouped can be referred to by a number or by a descriptive name.
Generally, when network programmers refer to a particular layer (e.g., Layer n), they are referring to the nth layer of the OSI model.
Each of the seven layers is illustrated in Figure 1-2
Each of the layers is responsible for some form of communication task, but each task is narrowly defined and usually relies on the services of one or more layers beneath it.
In some systems, one or more layers may be absent, while in other systems all layers are used.
Frequently, though, only a subset of the seven layers is employed by an operating system.
Generally, programmers limit themselves to working with one layer at a time; details of the layers below are thus hidden from view.
Breaking the network into layers leads to a much simpler system.
The physical layer is networking communication at its most basic level.
The physical layer governs the very lowest form of communication between net-work nodes.
At this level, networking hardware, such as cards and cables, transmit a sequence of bits between two nodes.
Java programmers do not work at this level—it is the domain of hardware driver developers and electrical engineers.
At this layer, no real attempt is made to ensure error-free data transmission.
Errors can occur for a variety of reasons, such as a spike in voltage due to interference from an outside source, or line noise in networks that use analog transmission media.
The data link layer is responsible for providing a more reliable transfer of data, and for grouping data together into frames.
Frames are similar to data packets, but are blocks of data specific to a single type of hardware architecture (whereas data packets are used at a higher level and can move from one type of network to another)
Frames have checksums to detect errors in transmission, and typically a "start" and "end" marker to alert hardware to the division between one frame and another.
Sequences of frames are transmitted between network nodes, and if a frame is corrupted it will be discarded.
The data link layer helps to ensure that garbled data frames will not be passed to higher layers, confusing applications.
However, the data link layer does not normally guarantee retransmission of corrupted frames; higher layers normally handle this behavior.
Moving up from the data link layer, which sends frames over a network, we reach the network layer.
The network layer deals with data packets, rather than frames, and introduces several and in the case of the Internet, all around the world.
Unless traveling to a node in an adjacent network where there is only one choice, these packets will often take alternative routes (the route is determined by routers)
Communication at this level is still very low-level; network programmers are rarely required to write software services for this layer.
The fourth layer, the transport layer, is concerned with controlling how data is transmitted.
This layer deals with issues such as automatic error detection and correction, and flow control (limiting the amount of data sent to prevent overload)
The purpose of the session layer is to facilitate application-to-application data exchange, and the establishment and termination of communication sessions.
Session management involves a variety of tasks, including establishing a session, synchronizing a session, and reestablishing a session that has been abruptly terminated.
Not every type of application will require this type of service, as the additional overhead of connection-oriented communication can increase network delays and bandwidth consumption.
Some applications will instead choose to use a connectionless form of communication.
The sixth layer deals with data representation and data conversion.
Different machines use different types of data representation (an integer might be represented by 8 bits on one system and.
The final OSI layer is the application layer, which is where the vast majority of programmers write code.
Application layer protocols dictate the semantics of how requests for services are made, such as requesting a file or checking for e-mail.
In Java, almost all network software written will be for the application layer, although the services of some lower layers may also be called upon.
The division of network protocols and services into layers not only helps simplify networking protocols by breaking them into smaller, more manageable units, but also offers greater flexibility.
By dividing protocols into layers, protocols can be designed for interoperability.
Lower-level layers, for example, can be substituted and replaced without having to modify or redesign higher-level layers, or recompile application software.
For example, a network layer protocol can work with an Ethernet network and a token ring network, even though at the physical and data link layers, two different protocols and hardware devices are being used.
In a world of heterogeneous networks, this is an important quality, as it makes networks interoperable.
The most important revolution in networking history has been the evolution of the Internet, a worldwide collection of smaller networks that share a common communication suite (TCP/IP)
The term evolution rather than creation is used here, as the Internet did not simply come into existence one day and start running.
Over the years, the Internet has been extended to include what we have today; it has evolved from a defense communications project called ARPANET into a worldwide collection of networks that spans both the commercial and noncommercial domains.
Contributions to the design of the Internet came from both the original ARPANET developers and from academic and commercial researchers who offered suggestions and improvements that helped shape what it is today.
The Internet is an open system, built on common network, transport, and application layer protocols, while granting the flexibility to connect a variety of computers, devices, and operating systems to it.
Whether an individual is running a PC, Unix, Macintosh, or Palm handheld computer, the complexities of communication and translation are handled transparently for users by the TCP/IP suite of protocols.
The history of the Internet is a fascinating topic, but one that some readers will find rather dry.
Those interested in learning more about the history of the Internet and the people involved in its evolution can consult a variety of resources online.
One of the best resources is from the Internet Society, at http://www.isoc.org/internet/history/
The Internet as we know it today is the result of many decades of innovation and experimentation.
The protocols that make up the TCP/IP suite have been carefully designed, tested, and improved upon over the years.
Some of the major goals (expressed in RFC 871[1]) were to achieve:
Resource sharing between networks, by creating network protocols that support internetwork communication or "internetting." The various protocols that make up the Internet must support a variety of networking gateways.
Hardware and software independence, by creating network protocols that would be interoperable with any CPU architecture, operating system, and networking card.
Reliability and robustness, by creating network protocols that would be fault tolerant, so that regardless of the state of intermediary networks, data could be rerouted if necessary in order to reach its destination.
Because the Internet started as a defense research project, robustness in the event of catastrophic network failure was extremely important.
Damaged networks can be circumvented so that the Internet at large remains accessible.
Good" protocols that are efficient and simple, by creating network protocols that exhibited quality design principles, such as the concepts of communication sockets, network ports, and so on.
Though such a design goal seems intuitive now, designers had to make a conscious effort to develop TCP/IP for long-term and high-volume use, and to make it as simple as possible to use.
The ease of interconnection between computers and networks connected to the Internet has been brought about by common protocols that are independent of specific hardware and software architectures, are robust and fault tolerant, and are efficient and simple to learn.
The Internet Protocol (IP) is a Layer 3 protocol (network layer) that is used to transmit data packets over the Internet.
It is undoubtedly the most widely used networking protocol in the world, and has spread prolifically.
Regardless of what type of networking hardware is used, it will almost certainly support IP networking.
Indeed, many organizations use the IP and related protocols within their local area networks, as it can be applied equally well internally as externally.
Information is exchanged between two hosts in the form of IP packets, also known as IP datagrams.
Each datagram is treated as a discrete unit, unrelated to any other previously sent packet—there are no "connections" between machines at the network layer.
Instead, a series of datagrams are sent and higher-level protocols at the transport layer provide connection services.
The IP datagram carries with it essential information for controlling how it will be delivered.
This information is stored inside the datagram header, which is followed by the actual data being sent.
The various header fields, and their sizes, are shown in Figure 1-4
Full coverage of the design and implementation details of the Internet Protocol would require extremely complex theory, well beyond the scope of this book.
A thorough knowledge of each individual IP datagram header field is not required for everyday programming.
Nonetheless, a rough understanding of how IP datagrams work will assist readers in understanding how Internet communication takes place; therefore a brief description of these header fields is offered.
The version field describes which version of the Internet Protocol is being used.
Future versions of the Internet Protocol will feature additional security, and include an expanded IP address space (greater than the current 32-bit address range) to allow more devices to have their own addresses.
The header length field specifies the length of the header, in multiples of 32 bits.
However, when additional options are used, this value can be greater.
The type of service field requests that a specific level of service be offered to the datagram.
Some applications may require quick responses to reduce network delays, greater reliability, or higher throughput.
The total length field states the total length of the datagram (including both header and data)
A maximum value of 65,536 bytes is usually imposed, but many networks may only support smaller sizes.
All networks are guaranteed to support a minimum of 576 bytes.
The identification field allows datagrams that are part of a sequence to be uniquely identified.
This field can be thought of as a sequence number, allowing ordering of datagrams that arrive out of sequence.
Sometimes when packets are sent between network gateways, one gate-way will support only smaller packets.
The flags field controls whether these datagrams may be fragmented (sent as smaller pieces and later reassembled)
Fields marked "do not fragment" are discarded and are undeliverable.
As datagrams are routed across the Internet, congestion throughout the network or faults in intermediate gateways may cause a datagram to be routed through long and winding paths.
So that datagrams don't get caught in infinite loops and congest the network even further, the time-to-live counter (TTL) field is included.
The value of this field is decremented every time it is routed by a gateway, and when it reaches zero the datagram is discarded.
It can be thought of as a self-destruct mechanism to prevent network overload.
The protocol type field identifies the transport level protocol that is using a datagram for information transmission.
Higher-level transport protocols rely on IP for sending messages across a network.
Each transport protocol has a unique protocol number, defined in RFC 790
For example, if TCP is used, the protocol field will have a value of 6
To safeguard against incorrect transmission of a datagram, a header checksum is used to detect whether data has been scrambled.
If any of the bits within the header have been modified in transit, the checksum is designed to detect this, and the datagram is discarded.
Not only can datagrams become lost if their TTL reaches zero, they can also fail to reach their destination if an error occurs in transmission.
The source IP address field and destination IP address fields are stored as two separate 32-bit values.
Note that there is no authentication mechanism to prove that a datagram originated from the specified source address.
Though not common, it is possible to use the technique of "IP spoofing" to make it appear that a datagram originated from a specific address, such as a trusted host.
The final field within the datagram header is an optional field that is not always present.
The datagram options field is of variable length, and contains flags to control security settings, routing information, and time stamping of individual datagrams.
The length of the options field must be a multiple of 32—if not, extra bits are added as padding.
The addressing of IP datagrams is an important issue, as applications require a way to deliver packets to specific machines and to identify the sender.
Each host machine under the Internet Protocol has a unique address, the IP address.
Although a physical address will normally be issued to a machine, once outside the local network in which it resides, the physical address is not very useful.
Even if somehow every machine could be located by its physical address, if the address changed for any.
Instead, a new type of address is introduced, that is not bound to a particular physical location.
The details of this address format are described in more detail in Chapter 3, but for the moment, think of the IP address as a numerical number that uniquely identifies a machine on the Internet.
Typically, one machine has a single IP address, but it can have multiple addresses.
A machine could, for example, have more than one network card, or could be assigned multiple IP addresses (known as virtual addresses) so that it can appear to the outside world as many different machines.
Machines connected to the Internet can send data to that IP address, and routers and gateways ensure delivery of the message.
To map between a physical network address and an IP address, host machines and routers on a local network can use the Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) and Reverse Address Resolution Protocol (RARP)
Such details, however, are more the domain of network administrators than of programmers.
In normal programming, only the IP address is needed—the physical address is neither useful nor accessible in Java.
While numerical address values serve the purposes of computers, they are not designed with people in mind.
Users who can remember thousands of 32-bit IP addresses in dotted decimal format and store them in their head are few and far between.
A much simpler addressing mechanism is to associate an easy-to-remember textual name with an IP address.
For example, companies on the Internet usually choose a .com address, such as www.microsoft.com, or java.sun.com.
The details of this addressing scheme are covered further in Chapter 3
Though the IP might seem to be an ineffectual means of transmitting information, it is actually highly efficient (leaving the provision of an error-control mechanism to other protocols if they require it)
Since the Internet Protocol provides absolutely no guarantee of datagram delivery, there is an obvious need for error-control mechanisms in many situations.
One such mechanism is the Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP), which is used in conjunction with the Internet Protocol to report errors when and if they occur.
When IP must notify another host of an error, it uses ICMP.
ICMP, on the other hand, uses IP to send the error message.
When minor errors occur, such as a corrupt header in a datagram, the datagram will be discarded without warning since the sender address in the header cannot be trusted.
Therefore a host cannot rely solely upon ICMP to guarantee delivery—the services of ICMP are more informational, to prevent wasted bandwidth if errors are likely to be repeated.
No guarantee is offered that ICMP messages will be sent, or that they will reach their intended destination.
As datagrams are passed from gateway to gateway, they will (it is hoped!) travel closer and closer to their final destination.
If a fault in the network occurs, a gateway may be unable to pass the datagram on to its destination.
In this case, the "destination unreachable" ICMP message is sent back to the original host.
When a gateway determines that there is a problem with any of the header parameters of an IP datagram and is unable to process them, the datagram is discarded and the sending host may be notified via a "parameter problem" ICMP message.
When a shorter path, or alternate route, is available, a gateway may send a "redirect" ICMP message to the router that passed on a datagram.
When too many datagram packets hit a router, gateway, or host, it may become overloaded and be unable to accept more packets.
This occurs when the buffer allocated for datagram storage becomes full, and datagrams can't be removed from the buffer as fast as they are coming in.
Rather than allowing datagrams to be discarded, an attempt is made to reduce the number of incoming datagrams, by sending a "source quench" ICMP message.
Whenever the TTL value of a datagram reaches zero, it is discarded.
When this occurs, a "time exceeded" ICMP message may be sent.
In addition to error messages, ICMP supports several informational messages.
These are not generated in response to error conditions, and are instead used to pass control information.
Used to determine whether a host is alive and can be reached.
In response to an "echo request" ICMP message, the recipient sends back an "echo reply" ICMP message.
Although no guarantee of message delivery is offered, repeated requests can be made if no response is received.
If the host is unreachable, then the last gateway dealing with the message should send back a "destination unreachable" ICMP message.
The "echo request" and "echo reply" messages are used by the "ping" application to test if a remote host is accessible.
Though not part of the original ICMP specification, functionality to determine the address mask (also known as a subnet mask) is added to the protocol in RFC 950
The address mask controls which bits of an IP address correspond to a host, and which bits determine the network/subnet portion.
A host can send an "address mask request" ICMP message, and receive an "address mask reply" ICMP message.
While ICMP is a useful protocol to be aware of, only a few network applications will make use of it, as its functionality is limited to diagnostic and error notification.
One of the most well known applications that use ICMP is the ping network application, used to determine if a host is active and what the delay is between sending a packet and receiving a response.
Java does not support ICMP access, so ping applications are impossible to write in Java.
Some Java textbooks include a UDP example called ping, but it is important to remember that this is not the real ping application.
The only way to write a true ping application in Java would be to use the Java Native Interface (JNI) to access native code; such a discussion is beyond the scope of this book.
The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is a Layer 4 protocol (transport layer) that provides guaranteed delivery and ordering of bytes.
A communications port is a numerical value (usually in the range 0–65,535) that can be used to distinguish one application or service from another.
An IP address can be thought of as the location of a block of apartments, and the port as the apartment number.
One host machine can have many applications connected to one or more ports.
An application could connect to a Web server running on a particular host, and also to an e-mail server to check for new mail.
TCP's main advantage is that it guarantees delivery and ordering of data, providing a simpler programming interface.
However, this simplicity comes at a cost, reducing network performance.
For faster communication, the User Datagram Protocol may be used.
The User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is a Layer 4 protocol (transport layer) that applications can use to send packets of data across the Internet (as opposed to TCP, which sends a sequence of bytes)
Raw access to IP datagrams is not very useful, as there is no easy way to determine which application a packet is for.
Like TCP, UDP supports a port number, so it can be used to send datagrams to specific applications and services.
Unlike TCP, UDP does not guarantee delivery of packets, or that they will arrive in the correct order.
In fact, UDP differs very little from IP datagrams, save for the introduction of a port number.
It may seem puzzling why anyone would want to use an unreliable packet delivery system.
The additional error checking of TCP adds overhead and delays, so UDP might be seen to offer better performance.
The pros and cons of UDP are discussed further in Chapter 5, but for now, it is sufficient to realize that error-free transmission comes at a cost, and UDP can be used as an alternative.
While network and transport layer protocols are certainly interesting, for network programmers the real excitement lies in the application layer.
At the application layer are network protocols that do real work, rather than just facilitating communication.
Here you'll find protocols for accessing and sending e-mail, transferring files, reading Web pages, and much more.
Application protocols generally run on a specific port number (also referred to as a well-defined port)
However, these services can be configured to run on a nonstandard port (for example, if two Web servers are operating on one machine)
Some of the more commonly used application protocols are examined below.
Telnet is a service that allows users to open a remote-terminal session to a specific machine.
This allows Unix users, for example, to access their account from terminal servers or desktop machines.
Since Unix servers are intended to support multiple users, a telnet session is often used, as only one person can access the machine from the local terminal (using a keyboard and monitor)
Telnet allows many users to connect over the network and to access their accounts as if they were doing so locally.
Even before the World Wide Web, people distributed images, documents, and software using the File Transfer Protocol (FTP)
For example, an anonymous account might be unable to write a file to the server, but may be able to read all files.
Messages are stored on a server, retrieved by an email client, and then deleted from the server.
This allows users to read mail offline, without being connected to the Internet.
While many browsers and e-mail clients support only POP3, some also support the Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP)
This protocol is less popular, as it requires a continual connection to the mail server, and thus increases bandwidth consumption and disk usage since messages are not stored on the user's system.
The separation between retrieving mail and sending mail might be perceived as a bit strange.
However, separation actually simplifies the process considerably, allowing different mail-retrieval protocols to be used and enabling custom mail accounts.
Detailed information about HTTP and accessing Web resources from Java will be given in Chapter 9
Finger is a handy protocol that allows someone to look up a person's account and find out certain information, such as when they last logged in and checked their mail.
Unfortunately, many administrators disable finger access for security reasons, and so it is no longer as prevalent as it was.
Usenet is a collection of discussion forums on a colorful and diverse number of topics, ranging from political and social commentary, to fan discussions about television programs, movies, and actors, to computing and business.
Online services such as DejaNews (http://www.dejanews.com/usenet/) provide a Web-based interface, but newsgroups can also be accessed via newsreader software that uses NNTP.
The WHOIS protocol allows users to look up information about a domain name (such as awl.com, or microsoft.com)
You can find some surprisingly useful information by doing this, such as the address of a company, who registered the domain name, and contact details for the registration.
Earlier in the chapter, the seven OSI network layers were discussed.
However, not all of these layers are used in Internet programming.
The TCP/IP suite of protocols can be mapped to a subset of the OSI layers, as shown in Figure 1-5
Data passes from the top application layer, down to the transport layer, and then flows on to the network layer.
At this stage, the data is sent across the Internet, and will reach a local area network or dial-up connection.
Below the network layer, the data will flow to the data link layer and finally to the physical layer.
Starting from the higher-level layers, protocol requests are encapsulated into the container of the previous layer.
POP3 uses TCP as its transport mechanism, and the command is encapsulated within a TCP segment.
The modem can send data across the phone line using sound waves (if you've ever listened to a fax machine, you'll know what these sound like)
At each layer, the request is encapsulated—but we as application programmers do not normally write a direct modem interface.
That's the domain of operating system and device driver developers, who work with low-level assembly language and operating system calls.
Instead, programmers use standard Internet services, and let the operating system and device drivers handle such complexities.
This is one of the perks of being a network programmer.
Network security is an important topic, both for network administrators charged with protecting the computer systems of companies and organizations and for developers producing network software.
Even if that software is fairly innocuous and not worth fitting out with sophisticated security mechanisms such as passwords and encryption, it is still important to take security issues into consideration, for the simple reason that network security restrictions on some local area networks may prevent software from working.
In an ideal world, we could implicitly trust incoming data from machines connected to the Internet, as well as the actions of colleagues sending outgoing data from within a local area network.
Indeed, in many ways the Internet is an open and trusting collection of hosts, allowing public access to information and services.
However, companies holding sensitive commercial information need to protect the integrity of their data to prevent access or modification by unauthorized individuals.
The solution adopted by most organizations is to draw a line in the sand, across which no machine outside of the private network can cross without authorization.
The firewall is a special machine that has been configured specifically to prohibit harmful (or as is sometimes the case in the business world, distracting) incoming or outgoing data.
Usually, but not always, the firewall system will be a stripped-down computer, with all nonessential services removed to minimize the potential for cracking/hacking.
The firewall is the first line of defense against intrusions from outside, and so any software that might assist in compromising the firewall should be removed, and all security patches for the operating system installed.
There are many commercial firewall packages available, and some are even designed for use on desktop machines by individuals.
Firewalls are most commonly separate machines except when used in companies and organizations where more than one or two individual machines are connected by, for example, a dial-up connection.
The firewall works by intercepting incoming communication from machines on the Internet, and outgoing communication from machines within a local area network, as shown in Figure 1-7
It operates at the packet level, intercepting IP datagrams that reach it.
By examining the header fields of these datagrams, the firewall can tell where the datagram is heading and from where it.
An outgoing datagram, for example, would have a source address from a machine within the firewall and a destination address from outside the firewall, whereas an incoming datagram would have a destination address of an internal machine and a source address external to the firewall.
Firewalls can also help prevent a hacking technique known as masquerading, whereby an external host fakes the IP address of an internal machine to appear to be a legitimate machine, thus gaining access to resources.
While there are legitimate uses for the masquerading of IP addresses (such as within an intranet), incoming datagrams from the Internet that use masquerading are suspect, and a firewall can make the distinction to filter them out.
The firewall draws a line in the sand, insulating internal computers from the Internet.
Firewalls offer administrators very powerful security and fine-grained control of the network.
For example, outgoing data may be given greater access than incoming, and perhaps only certain machines within the network will be allowed Internet access, or only at certain times.
Certain protocols, for example, might be allowed through (blocking UDP packets to certain machines and not others, or TCP access to certain port ranges)
Many network administrators configure their firewalls to block all access by default, and then allow only limited network access through a proxy server.
A proxy server is a machine that acts as a proxy for application protocols.
The server accepts incoming connections from machines within a local network, and makes requests on their behalf to machines connected to the Internet.
This has two advantages: direct access to internal machines is never established, and the proxy server can control the transaction.
This means that popular protocols such as HTTP may be permitted or perhaps limited to certain Web sites.
However, newer protocols such as RealAudio, or custom applications including games and application software, are not always permitted.
Most proxy servers also log networking events, to allow network administrators to track unusual communications and their origin—in this way, employees visiting inappropriate sites or goofing off during work can be easily monitored.
This might sound worrisome, and introduce some very serious legal and privacy issues, but there are legitimate security concerns addressed by logging, such as identifying disloyal employees who are visiting job-search sites or sending information to competitors.
While the firewall is an excellent tool for network administrators, it is frequently the developer's worst enemy.
Most corporate firewalls, for example, block direct UDP and TCP access, making these protocols (and any applications that use them for communication) unusable.
There is always a tradeoff between functionality and security—developers who have users behind firewalls become keenly aware of just what that tradeoff costs.
This means that developers must make a choice—either use standard Internet protocols and ignore users who work within a firewall, or.
Neither choice is preferable, as one eliminates a portion of the potential user base and the other involves considerably more work for the developer, and significantly greater overhead in data transmission.
Java does support HTTP proxy servers, which means that users within a firewall will normally be able to communicate using that protocol.
Where possible, however, direct use of UDP or TCP is a much better choice for communication, as they both offer a simpler interface and better performance.
Interposing a proxy server and HTTP between direct network communications can add delays that are several orders of magnitude greater.
To manually specify a proxy server for Java to use for HTTP communication, a value can be assigned to the proxyHost and proxyPort system properties.
System properties are Java-specific, and are covered in more detail in Chapter 2
An understanding of the basics of networking theory is essential for network programmers, as this theory provides the foundation on which the practical side of networking is based.
To assist in this regard, networking communication is broken into seven layers (forming the Open Systems Interconnection, or OSI, Reference Model)
At the most basic level, communication deals with individual bits of information.
There are a wide variety of network mediums, ranging from dial-up modems to local area networks.
At the physical and data link layers, various hardware types and network protocols can be used, making networks inter operable.
We as Java programmers do not need to concern ourselves with such issues, however, and in fact are unable to access such low-level network devices.
TCP/IP communication uses a subset of the OSI model, dealing only with the network, transport, and application layers.
It is these layers, more than any others, that Java programmers must be familiar with.
As one moves higher and higher up the OSI levels, hardware issues are put aside and more and more levels of abstraction are introduced.
First there is the network layer, which deals with the dispatch of packets over a network and the issue of addresses.
The Internet Protocol (IP) is used for this purpose, and machines are identified by an IP address.
At the transport layer, protocols offer different characteristics, such as high-speed transmission or guaranteed delivery.
The same machine can provide many services, and a client can access many services concurrently.
For this reason, an address is not sufficient, and the concept of a port is added.
The two main transport protocols in use are TCP and UDP, both of which Java supports.
In addition, ICMP is used by IP to handle network errors—Java, however, does not support ICMP access.
Finally, at the application layer, networking software uses application protocols to communicate with remote software services.
The range of application protocols is vast, and new protocols are continuously being designed.
Some, such as HTTP and e-mail, are destined to become extremely popular, while others are custom protocols used by a very small community.
Much network programming involves the implementation of these network protocols, although fortunately Java provides classes that implement HTTP for Web access for convenience.
The term security covers a wide spectrum, but in this context we mean network security, and most importantly the firewall.
Network administrators normally protect critical systems by using a firewall; the firewall is a.
The effect of firewalls and proxy servers on users and developers.
Java Overview This chapter provides an introduction to the Java programming language and the Java platform.
The information presented here is expected to benefit both novice and experienced Java practitioners; Java programmers with experience writing applets may be unaware of the range of Java programming environments available, including stand-alone applications, JavaBean software components, and Java servlets.
Readers will also learn some of the finer points of the Java language, including exception handling, and be given an overview of the various networking Application Program Interfaces (APIs) of Java.
The name Java is applied to a variety of technologies created by Sun Microsystems.
While the reader will instantly associate Java with a programming language (which it most certainly is), in actuality Java is also much more.
The Java programming language— a programming language used to write software for the Java platform.
The Java platform— a range of runtime environments that support execution of software written in Java.
The Java API— a rich, fully featured class library that provides graphical user interface, data storage, data processing, I/O, and networking support.
Each of these parts is equally important, and is discussed individually below.
The Java programming language has an interesting history, and draws heavily from earlier objectoriented languages such as C++ and Smalltalk.
While the success of Java has been phenomenal, it is important to remember that as of 2002, Java was still the "new kid on the block."
In the early 1990s a team at Sun Microsystems began work on a language for the embedded systems market.
This language would be used to develop the software that would power consumer electronics products such as handheld PDA units.
The language, when completed, was called Oak, named after the type of tree outside the project leader's window.
As many C++ developers will attest, the language is powerful, but includes many features that, when used improperly, can have unpleasant side effects, such as memory leaks and runtime errors including cross pointers.
Instead, a language that carried many of the benefits of C++ and other object-oriented languages, but few of the disadvantages, was born.
But what does a language called Oak have to do with the language we know today as Java? After a change in focus from consumer electronics to online services, the Oak team incorporated their programming language into a Web browser.
This browser was named HotJava, and when released in March 1995 it changed the way people looked at the Web.
Instead of static pages, or dynamically generated pages created at the server end, the Web now had active documents that executed Java applets.
Both Netscape and Microsoft licensed this technology for use in their respective Web browsers, and the language became a runaway success.
Further information about the history of Java can be found in the article at http://java.sun.com/features/1998/05/birthday.html.
While many of its properties are present in other languages, the sheer popularity and rapid adoption of Java by programmers indicate that Sun Microsystems found the right mix of functionality and sophistication.
Many of the so-called features of C++, such as multiple inheritance, dramatically increased the complexity of the software.
In addition, Java was designed from the ground up to support the World Wide Web and the Internet, making it an attractive choice for network programming.
Some of the most important properties of Java are its.
Older languages such as C, Pascal, and Basic are procedural languages.
While it is certainly possible to produce software using procedural languages, such languages do not offer the most efficient way to do so, nor are they robust.
Rather than thinking of software in terms of procedures and data structures, in an object-oriented language we think in terms of classes and objects.
Classes have member variables, which store data and methods that act on that data.
In an objectoriented language, procedures are replaced with methods, leading to more cohesive software.
This can be thought of as combining a data structure with procedures that act upon the data structure.
Most programmers find objects simpler to work with than procedures, and find that writing code in an object-oriented language is more productive.
By applying good object-oriented design principles, it becomes easier to integrate different parts of a software project, and object orientation makes large projects more manageable, by dividing large modules of code into small classes.
Other features such as class inheritance and visibility modifiers (the public, private, and protected keywords of Java) make object-oriented languages much easier and safer to work with than older procedural languages.
Procedural languages can be used to develop networking software, and indeed C remains a popular choice today for Unix networking software.
However, network programming in any language is not a walk in the park.
When designing large and complex systems such as network servers, any technique that can minimize the complexity of software development is important, and in this respect an object-oriented language such as Java is exceedingly preferable to procedural languages.
Object-oriented languages may make software development easier, but object orientation alone is not the answer.
Indeed, some object-oriented languages such as C++ are renowned for their complexity.
This is not to disparage C++, of course, but features such as direct memory access through pointers (a throwback from C), and the need for programmers to explicitly allocate and deallocate memory regions for the storage of objects and data structures, as well as multiple inheritance, make it a complex language.
Although Java shares a common heritage with C++, it is a far simpler language to learn.
In Java, there are no pointers through which memory can be accessed.
Only through object references can a programmer access another object.
While classes can inherit from one class, they cannot inherit from a second.
This keeps coding simpler, which is important for any type of application but particularly so in the case of networking.
Of course, simplicity is a relative thing—Java is far simpler than many other object-oriented languages, but many first-time programmers still find it a steep learning curve due to the power of the language.
In languages such as C and C++, programmers must explicitly request that a memory region be set aside for data structures and classes.
In most software, variables are used for short-term storage, and memory is allocated and deallocated frequently.
This amounts to more work for developers, as memory must be set aside and then reclaimed when it is no longer needed.
If this is not done, the application will consume more memory than is needed, affecting system performance.
If memory is not reclaimed and the application terminates, it may become permanently reserved, leading to a memory leak.
When a new instance of an object is declared, the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) allocates the appropriate amount of memory for it automatically.
When the object is no longer needed, a null value can be assigned to the object reference, and the automatic garbage collection thread will silently reclaim the memory for later use, without the programmer having to worry about how or when this occurs (such as when the application is idle and waiting for input)
If a reference to an object is not maintained, and not explicitly assigned a null value, the garbage collector will still reclaim the memory (for example, if a temporary object is created by a method, and the method terminates)
Since networking servers will service many different clients over the course of their lifetime, memory is frequently allocated and deallocated.
Even a network client benefits from automatic garbage collection—any nontrivial network protocol will require a client to set aside memory for data storage and processing.
By preventing memory leaks, such software will offer better performance during the course of its execution.
Java's main claim to fame is that it is operating system and hardware neutral—Java software is capable of running on a wide variety of platforms without the need for recompilation of software by programmers, or modification of source code.
For commercial software developers, however, portability amounts to big cost and time savings, as software can be written for a single environment: the Java platform.
Software written for Java can then be executed on any CPU type and operating system that supports Java, without the need to modify and convert source code (a process known as porting)
Whether a programmer is writing for one operating system or a hundred, the amount of work required is the same.
Though C++ networking software can be written for both Unix and Wintel systems, networking system calls are vastly different (even between Unix variants)
Java provides a standard interface to sockets that is operating system neutral.
Java source code is compiled into bytecode, which is executed by the JVM.
This means that Java code does not run as fast as native code compiled to machine language instructions.
While some attempts have been made to increase the performance of Java software, such as just-in-time (JIT) compilers that convert Java bytecode to native code, developers and users will find that performance is not as fast as comparable C++ code, and that a greater amount of memory is consumed.
There are also, of course, operating-system-specific differences between Java applications.
A Macintosh applet or application will have a different GUI than that of a Windows or Unix system.
Glitches in initial releases caused problems when running software on different platforms due to defects in early JVM implementations, but for the most part, the promise of Java portability remains strong.
Programmers working in languages such as C or PERL may have come across the concept of multiple processes.
In operating systems such as Unix, processes are used quite heavily by software.
A process can split itself into many parts, which execute concurrently, by using the and variables is duplicated among each process.
A multi-threaded language supports concurrent processing, but with shared memory for application code and data.
This allows threads to conserve memory and interact with each other to work collaboratively if required.
The it is possible to write trivial client and server applications without using multiple threads of execution, even a moderately complex server will typically use the technique of multi-threading.
Having this support within Java is useful, and makes it an attractive choice for almost any type of programming.
Other languages, too, have multi-threaded support (often in the form of an add-on API or operating system calls), but Java has been designed from the ground up to support such programming, and provides language keywords to simplify writing thread-safe code.
In a networked world, security is an extremely important issue for software developers.
After all, systems connected to a public network are far more vulnerable to attack than a system connected to a closed private network.
When systems contain sensitive data, they are prime targets for attacks, but even systems with little or no useful data can be compromised and used to hijack other systems.
Because of such risks, developers must take the issue of security very seriously.
Of course, while many developers write their own security mechanisms, it is often useful if a language enforces some form of security of its own.
This can save developers both time and effort, and it is reassuring to know that users will have an equitable level of security installed by default.
Java is often billed as a "secure" language, and while it is impossible for a language to guarantee absolute security (much of this must be the responsibility of individual programmers, and the.
In an ideal world, Java code could be implicitly trusted to execute without causing damage or a security breach.
In the real world, Java uses the "sandbox" approach, wherein untrusted code, which includes classes downloaded over a network within a Web browser, is placed within the sandbox and required to meet certain expectations.
In addition, the new Java 2 security model makes it possible to sandbox other classes, whether downloaded over the network or loaded locally (such as in an application)
Using default settings, however, only applet code is placed in the sandbox.
When a Java class is placed in the sandbox, it must "play fairly," and it finds its actions severely restricted.
Prior to the Java 2 security model, digitally signed classes, or classes loaded from the user's hard drive, such as a stand-alone application, did not need to be placed in the sandbox and had free reign over the JVM.
With the introduction of the Java 2 security model, however, it is possible to change almost any aspect of the security settings, giving greater or lesser privileges to classes running inside and outside of the browser.
During a browser session, applets are faced with several significant limitations.
Network access is restricted to a single machine, namely the machine from which the applet was loaded.
Applets cannot bind to local ports, to masquerade as a legitimate service.
While threads may be used freely, no external processes may be started (such as.
A custom security manager can impose additional restrictions, or relax some of them if need be.
However, once assigned a security manager, the JVM will not permit a second manager to be appointed.
Thus it is not possible to override browser security restrictions, but in a custom network application, developers can customize their security settings.
Additionally, the Java 2 platform supports security policies that give finer-grained control over security settings.
An example is given in Chapter 11, in which a security policy is defined that restricts file access to prevent code downloaded over a network from accessing or modifying the hard drive.
Obviously, there are many advantages to network programming of a language being Internet aware.
While other languages such as C and C++ can be used to write Internet applications, they rely on special libraries that must be imported, and change from operating system to operating system.
The Java language provides a rich, fully featured networking API that offers a consistent interface for Java developers no matter what platform they are running.
The networking API is also well designed, and is certainly easier to pick up than those of other languages.
The combination that Java offers of networking classes and input/output streams makes it easy to use and efficient to program in.
In particular, Java offers classes for the following network resources:
However, Java's networking support is not limited to the above.
Java software can be written to execute within a Web browser (the applet), as well as within a Web server (the servlet)
Java also supports higher-level network communication, in the form of two distributed systems technologies:
Each of these technologies allows methods of an object to be invoked from a remote application executing in a separate JVM.
Certainly the language is an important part of Java technology, but the story doesn't end there.
As a third-generation language, the source code instructions written in Java must be compiled to a form that the computer is capable of understanding.
Most languages would be compiled to native machine code, capable of running on a specific CPU architecture.
The problem with that approach, however, is that code must be compiled for all the likely CPU architectures that the user may want (resulting in many software builds, as well as issues of distribution for developers), or for a single architecture that the user must adapt to the software—neither are optimum solutions.
For those unfamiliar with the term third-generation language, this refers to a language that must be converted to a machine-readable format before it can be executed.
A second-generation language is written in assembly language, which is a very low-level form of programming that is best suited to those who are "at one with the computer," and not ordinary programmers.
A first-generation language is raw machine code, capable of being read and executed only by the CPU.
Instead of creating machine code for particular pieces of hardware, Java source code is compiled to execute on a single CPU architecture.
Now this may seem, at first, counterproductive for achieving portability.
In fact, it sounds no different to the approach a C++ or Visual Basic compiler might take.
There is, however, a big difference: in most cases there isn't an actual hardware chip that runs the Java machine code.
Java machine code, referred to as Java bytecode, is executed by a special piece of software that mimics a CPU chip capable of understanding bytecode.
Only a few types of CPUs capable of executing bytecode natively exist at present (though this will change within the near future as the demand for high-performance Java devices increases), and they are typically used in embedded systems in which the overhead of translation is prohibitive.
The concept of emulation isn't new—emulation is often used to re-create older CPU systems such as long-dead gaming consoles or mainframe systems.
This provides access to software that, while aged, is still very useful.
While there are a growing number of chips capable of running Java bytecode, they remain specialized systems not yet found on a PC motherboard.
The average computer must be capable of running Java code without new chips, so a "virtual" machine is emulated.
For any CPU architecture, and any operating system that needs to run Java, a JVM is written.
This allows Java software to run on Unix as well as Windows systems.
Software emulation of a hardware device suffers from a moderately serious drawback—performance.
Java software runs far slower than comparable code written in a language that supports native compilation.
While many techniques can be applied to speed up performance, such as just-in-time (JIT) compilation (which converts Java code to native code when it is first loaded), Java is still not as fast as its C++ cousin.
With continuing advances in CPU performance, the speed of Java becomes less and less of an issue.
While the JVM is capable of running Java bytecode, it is not a software application that can itself be run.
Usually, the JVM is hosted within a Java runtime environment (JRE)
The JRE will also include the core classes from the Java API (see Section 2.4), and other supporting files.
This is a cut-down version of the Java 2 platform, with the emphasis on a lightweight implementation suitable for use on low-memory systems.
Browser runtime environments— allowing Java code to execute within the browser, to serve up interactive content that is downloaded from a Web site.
Applets can be used to write user interfaces, games, and even entire software applications, but are subject to necessary security restrictions to prevent "harmful" applets from compromising security.
Web-server runtime environments— allowing Java code to run within a Web server, to dynamically generate Web pages and content.
In the early days of the Web, pages were static and unchanging—they required manual intervention by a Web master to change their content.
The arrival of dynamically generated Web pages changed completely what could be done with a Web site, through Common Gateway Interface (CGI) scripts written in languages like PERL.
Server-side Java can generate customized pages, based on user interaction, and access other content such as databases or networking resources.
Servlets are much faster than applets, as they don't need to be downloaded to the user's browser; only their output is downloaded.
Of course, servlets must send data as HTML, or as a custom file-type, so the user can't interact with them in the same way as an applet.
A second type of Java application for the Web server is Java Server Pages (JSP), a scriptlike version of Java that is compiled into a servlet.
Many third-party vendors, including IBM and Microsoft, provide runtime environments.
It is or JDK1.02, and some support only a subset of the Java API.
For example, by default, the implementation for the Java remote method invocation packages (which allow objects hosted by a remote JVM to be used as if they were local) is missing from the Microsoft JVM.
An additional download is required for the Microsoft JVM to support RMI.
The latest runtime environment from Sun Microsystems is guaranteed to support the full API, but that is not to say that third-party runtime environments do not have their place.
Many offer better performance, or are the only runtime environment available for a particular operating system or CPU architecture.
If a programming language is viewed as the mind of software, and the JVM as the heart that keeps that software beating, then the Application Program Interface (API) must surely be Java's arms and legs.
The API provides a rich suite of classes and components that allow Java to do real work, such as:
Of course, the above list constitutes only a sampling of the power of Java.
The API consists of a set of packages that are collections of commonly related classes offering specific features.
While the Java packages are extremely interesting, and readers who have not previously done so are urged to investigate the API documentation that Sun provides to see what functionality is offered, the coverage of this book is limited to network programming.
Of most interest to readers will be the various networking packages that allow Java developers to create network applications and services.
An online version of Sun's API documentation can be found at Sun's Web site at http://java.sun.com/docs/
Readers are advised, however, to download a copy of the documentation and view it locally, as this will mean reduced Internet access charges and faster access to documentation.
The following is a list of the major networking packages that form the Java API.
Package java.net— comprises the majority of classes that deal with Internet programming.
This package provides the basic building blocks needed to write network applications and services, such as UDP packets, TCP sockets, IP addresses, URLs, and HTTP connections.
Package java.rmi.*— a set of packages that support remote method invocation (RMI), allowing objects hosted by a remote JVM to be used as if they were local objects.
In addition, several other packages are available to developers in the form of a Java extension.
Java extensions are add-ons that don't ship with the core Java API but may be installed separately by users, developers, and administrators.
JavaMail— an extension that provides access to e-mail services, allowing Java software to send and receive electronic mail.
Java Servlets— an extension that allows Java software to produce dynamic content for a Web site, by executing within a Web server.
Each of these packages and extensions are covered in later chapters; interested readers may want to consult the API documentation to gain an understanding of the scope of the networking classes that the API provides.
The range of networking classes provided by Java makes it an ideal language for network programming.
Having been designed from the ground up to support networking, developers will find Java a far easier language to work with than, for example, C or C++
There are no annoying data structures and pointers to worry about, nor is there a need to change networking libraries when moving from a Wintel platform to Unix.
That said, there are some unique considerations and restrictions relative to Java of which developers must be mindful.
First, readers should be aware that Java does not provide low-level access to Internet protocols.
Some languages make it possible to write raw IP datagrams and to send ICMP messages.
While this will not affect many developers, it does mean that Java can't be used to write, for example, a ping application that sends ICMP echo request messages.
It also means that developers can't create custom transport protocols that run on IP datagrams (for example, creating a substitute for TCP)
While stand-alone applications and servlets have free reign when it comes to network access, applets will find their actions limited.
Consider the risk to users if applets—which are downloaded automatically and may not be visible to the user if the size of the applet is set very small, say a few pixels in size—could connect to any machine on the Internet to send data, or could connect to machines within a local area network (LAN)
They would undoubtedly be used to compromise the security of machines.
The ability to bypass a firewall and run from within a LAN would make them a severe security risk.
The designers of Java, and browser manufacturers, sought to balance the need for functionality against the need for security.
Rather than running the risk of network administrators barring the use of Java (either through firewall filters, or the configuration of browsers to disable access to Java applets), a decision was made to limit applets' network access.
No applet may bind to a local port, to prevent an applet masquerading as a legitimate service (such as a Web server)
An applet may connect only to the machine from which its codebase[1] was loaded (usually, but not always, the same Web server of the page that hosts the applet), to prevent applets from accessing internal servers or covertly sending data to another site.
Now, these conditions may seem quite severe, and the reader may be wondering what use Java is for networking if an applet is limited to a single machine.
Rest assured, however, that the restrictions apply only to applets (which make up a small part of the world of Java programming), and that they help safeguard users and the reputation of Java.
A digitally signed applet may be granted greater network privileges (as well as access to other resources, such as files and printers)
However, digitally signing code is a complex task, and acquiring a digital certificate with which to sign involves great expense for the average Java developer (though large corporations will obviously find it less of a financial burden)
There are many code-signing mechanisms and they vary from browser to browser.
Instead of dealing with a single user, or the resources of a single machine (such as files and database connections), network programming gives software the ability to communicate with machines scattered around the globe.
This gives software access to potentially millions of external resources, as well as millions of users.
The applications of such connectivity are limited only by the imagination—and the bandwidth of a network connection.
What follows is a brief overview of the practical applications of network programming.
This discussion is by no means exhaustive—one of the wonders of the Internet is the creativity and imagination that it inspires in individuals to drive it forward, with the design of new protocols and new networking applications.
With the wide variety of networking protocols used today on the Internet, and the prolific rate at which new ones are developed, a common use for Java is to create network clients, such as mail readers, remote file transfer applications, and software that browses the Web.
Of course, users can download existing software for these purposes off the Internet, most of which is freely available for noncommercial use.
However, it is always possible to improve upon software and provide new features.
Furthermore, most existing software is compiled to run on a specific CPU and operating system, so portable network clients written in Java offer an advantage over their compiled cousins.
Another important use for Java is in the design of new network protocols for which no client yet exists.
Whether you are prototyping a client for testing a protocol or building a commercialstrength client, Java can be used to create network clients in much less time than a C++ counterpart.
Traditionally, computer games involve a challenge against computer opponents, with a single player (or perhaps two players if an alternate input device such as a joystick is available) battling to overcome challenges and obstacles controlled by some simple game logic.
In some games, more sophisticated game logic is employed, to create more complex behavior that is more challenging.
Despite even the most sophisticated artificial intelligence algorithms, such games lack the intelligence of human players, and often exhibit predictable patterns that can be exploited.
For novice gamers this may actually be advantageous, but more advanced gamers prefer the challenge of human players.
Playing against human opponents, then, is preferable to playing against computer-generated ones.
One major application of network communication in practice is multiplayer games that run over a LAN, or online gaming that runs over the Internet.
Java is ideally suited to this, due in part to its built-in support for Internet programming and to the ease with which games can be distributed to users.
Rather than downloading and installing special software (something that many users are wary of for security reasons), games can be played from within a Web browser, in the form of a Java applet.
The term software agent is used in many different ways, to encompass a variety of software applications.
Indeed, a precise definition that everyone can agree upon is hard to come by, as programmers, journalists, and authors use the term to refer to different things.
Some people think of agents as intelligent programs that can think for themselves, while others believe agents to be mobile programs that zip across networks searching for information.
In actual fact, such descriptions apply only to certain types of agents—software does not have to be either intelligent or mobile to qualify as a software agent.
Simply put, a software agent is a software process that acts on the behalf of one or more users, to perform specific commands and tasks or to fulfill a set of goals.
An agent may use predefined logic, or may be flexible enough to modify itself as it learns about its environment and the user, and may even exhibit signs of intelligent programming (hence the term intelligent agents)
Some agents will use network protocols to search for information or resources on a network, while other agents can transfer themselves from one machine to another (hence the term mobile agents)
Many people think of agents as either intelligent, mobile, or both.
Indeed, very few agents could be said to exhibit significant degrees of intelligence, and few agents are actually mobile—most rely instead on established network protocols to gather information or access resources rather than jumping from host to host themselves.
Theories and definitions aside, let's look at some examples of software agents in practice.
An agent that sorts through e-mail messages and filters out unsolicited commercial e-mail commonly known as spam.
An agent that searches for information on the Web, either directly by looking at Web sites, or by sending queries to one or more search engines.
An agent that learns what type of news stories a user is interested in, and fetches suitable content from news sources such as CNN, MSNBC, and other major media sites.
An agent that compares prices on products for users across a variety of sites, and offers "comparison shopping" through a Web interface.
Mobile agents that send themselves to a central meeting site to exchange information and barter for prices on products or services, and then return to their users with prices and costs.
An agent that monitors a source of information (such as a store catalog), for changes relating to the interest of a user, such as movie releases starring a particular actor or actress, or new novels by a particular author.
Such an agent might e-mail one or more users to alert them to this change.
Of course, software agents can be written to perform all sorts of tasks, limited only by one's imagination.
For some time, artificial intelligence researchers have been predicting that software agents will be the next "killer application," and that we'll see agents roaming the Web and working for us.
While such a vision may be overly optimistic, software agents are likely to be a significant growth area in the future.
As a language, Java is ideally suited to the development of software agents.
With its built-in support for HTTP communication, agent developers can easily make their agents "Web aware," without the need to write a custom HTTP implementation.
This helps agent developers concentrate on the application, without being overly burdened by developing the network code.
Another major challenge for software agent developers is making them mobile.
While an agent does not need to be mobile, and can rely on network protocols for communication, sometimes it is advantageous for an agent to relocate to another machine.
This conserves bandwidth and reduces the time taken to send messages.
Few languages were designed with mobile code in mind, however.
Here is where Java really shines—not only is Java bytecode portable from one machine to another regardless of the underlying operating system or CPU architecture, but the designers of Java recognized the need for developers to transmit code over a network.
Java's support for this comes in the form of remote method invocation (RMI), which supports dynamic loading of new classes downloaded from the Internet.
One of the most important areas for Java network programming is the Web.
The rapid growth of the Internet, and the popularity of the browser, has made Web surfing a pastime.
Whether it is searching for information, communicating and exchanging ideas, or shopping, people find the Web entertaining, and it has become a popular medium.
Java applets executing within a browser can provide amusement, but they also have practical applications, such as performing calculations or displaying information in a more interactive form than static HTML pages.
However, the real power of Java on the Web lies not on the client side, where it is hindered by security restrictions, but inside the Web server.
Within the Web server, Java code can perform a variety of tasks such as accessing databases and interacting with other systems.
For example, a shopping cart servlet might track a user's order and then verify credit card details before accepting an order.
Server-side Java is very powerful, and an programming and server-side Java Web development, we'll be covering this in a later chapter.
Readers should be aware, however, that programming Web applications for Java no longer means just simple applets that run client-side.
Many programmers who learned Java when it was first released may not have made the transition yet to server-side Java development.
Indeed, most textbooks covering Web programming continue to overemphasize the importance of the applet, and omit server-side Java programming altogether.
Server-side Java already is an important area of Java development, and thus a useful skill for the Java network programmer.
More and more portal and e-commerce sites are adopting server-side Java, and those who want to write Web applications need to understand this area.
It is sometimes impractical to run large and complex systems on a single machine.
For example, a task may be so complex that it requires many CPUs working on it concurrently in order to be completed in a reasonable amount of time.
Sometimes, resources will be distributed across an organization, and distributed systems technologies are used to integrate them (for example, databases and inventory systems from different departments)
With its choice of two distributed systems technologies (RMI and CORBA), developers can create systems that span many computers.
There are many large distributed systems, using a variety of languages and technologies that work cooperatively to complete tasks.
The most well known is the SETI@Home project, which harnesses the idle CPU power to process signal data obtained from observatories listening for signs of extraterrestrial intelligence.
While certainly not the only language suitable for distributed systems, Java does make an excellent platform for it.
Another use for distributed systems is connecting older "legacy" systems within an organization to newer systems or to a Web interface.
The use of technologies like CORBA as middleware is very act as the glue that binds all these disparate machines and services together.
While readers should be familiar with at least the basics of the Java programming language and will likely be proficient with the language, there are some issues, delineated below, that all readers should be aware of.
Exception handling is a mechanism for dealing with errors that occur in software at runtime.
Anyone who has done programming is familiar with errors in source code (often due to typing errors, or breaking the rules of the language) that occur at compile time, but the notion of runtime error-handling may be new to some readers; some may instead be familiar with badly written software that simply crashes.
Even if source code is perfectly correct in syntax, errors can occur when running the software.
For example, while attempting to read from a file, an application may be unable to proceed because the file is missing.
This is an example of an error that occurs at runtime.
In languages such as C, the onus for error checking was placed on the programmer but was not rigidly enforced.
An application could, for example, obtain a handle to read from a file, but if the file were not found, a null value would be returned.
Good programmers would check for the null value and output an appropriate error message, but there was no obligation to do so.
While checking to see if a file was opened seems to be a fairly obvious practice, it is easy to overlook a potential error condition such as this.
In more complex applications, where third-party libraries are used that can exhibit unpredictable errors, a program can run into serious problems at runtime that aren't detected and handled appropriately.
The solution is to rigidly enforce error handling, through exception handling.
Exceptions are unusual conditions (usually, but not always, errors) that occur at runtime and are represented as objects.
These exception objects contain member variables that track information about the error condition, making it possible to diagnose the cause of a problem or at least to provide clues as to why it occurred.
When an exception occurs, the method in which it occurs will "throw" the exception and pass it up to the calling method.
The calling method may choose to handle the error condition and thus "catch" the exception, or it may throw the exception to its calling method (and so on, as the exception propagates up the stack), as shown in Figure 2-1
Exceptions may be either thrown, or caught, by a calling method.
Methods that are likely to generate exceptions will indicate the type of exception that will be thrown.
A calling method must catch the exception and provide error-handling code or indicate that it throws that type of exception.
This means that at some point in the code, the exception must be caught and dealt with.
Without exception handling, it would be easy to miss errors that could occur at runtime.
While developers might never see them in testing, users most certainly would.
There are many different types of exceptions, to suit the many different types of errors that can occur in software.
However, all exceptions share a common class inheritance, from the java.lang.Throwable class.
In Java, exceptions are grouped into two categories, represented by the class tree in Figure 2-2
Exceptions that are extended from the Error class are serious errors that typical Java software should not encounter, and which in any case the developer will have no control over.
While methods may certainly attempt to catch these errors, they are not required to do so.
This may seem contrary to the reasoning behind exceptions (to force developers to handle errors), but as they are almost always beyond the control of the programmer and extremely rare, it is certainly understandable for compilers to enforce handling of them.
OutOfMemoryError— thrown when the JVM can no longer allocate memory to objects and the garbage collector can free no further objects.
Exceptions that are extended from the Exception class, on the other hand, should nearly always be dealt with by calling methods.
Omitted from this rule are subclasses of the RuntimeException class.
These types of exceptions are usually fairly serious errors, which are difficult to recover from.
Nonetheless, if there is a good reason for encountering them and dealing with them, programmers are free to add exception-handling code even though a compiler will not require it.
Some examples of exceptions that fall into this category are:
NoSuchElementException— thrown when an attempt is made to access the next element of an enumeration, but all elements have been exhausted.
NullPointerException— thrown when an attempt to reference an object has been made, but the reference was null.
SecurityException— thrown by the current security manager when an attempt to access a resource, object, or method has been made but not permitted.
Dealing with exceptions can involve either catching them or throwing the exception to a calling method.
There are many different types of exceptions, and many of these have subclasses of exceptions.
For example, when dealing with TCP sockets, it is possible for a SocketException to be thrown.
The SocketException class has several subclasses, however, that indicate more specific error conditions.
A ConnectException may have been thrown, to indicate that the connection was refused, or a NoRouteToHost connection may have been thrown, to indicate that the network connection to the host is down or blocked by a firewall.
As readers work through the various classes that make up the Java API, and their methods, an enormous range of exceptions will be encountered.
Rather than provide an exhaustive list here, when methods of a class are discussed in later chapters, the methods likely to be thrown will be covered.
To deal with errors that occur at runtime, programmers must write an exception handler.
This is a special section of code that catches any thrown exceptions.
How programmers choose to handle such code is not prescribed (for example, an error message could be output to the user or the exception ignored), but an exception must be caught and dealt with, unless a method indicates that it will throw an exception itself.
The try statement indicates a block of code that can generate exceptions.
Unless a method that throws a specific type of exception instead of handling it is being written, any code that generates an exception within a try block must be enclosed.
For example, if the programmer is dealing with network I/O and his or her method doesn't declare that it.
The catch statement is used to catch exceptions thrown within a try block of code.
A catch statement must specify which exception it is dealing with; many catch statements can be applied to a single try statement.
The finally statement is a generic catchall for cleaning up after a try block.
Whether exceptions were thrown or not, the code within a finally statement will be executed.
Unless a method indicates that it throws an exception, the compiler will enforce exception handling.
Any code that uses a method that indicates it throws an exception must be enclosed within a try block.
If an exception does occur, execution of the code within the try block stops immediately, and the exception will be caught by a catch block or calling method.
Code outside of try block should not throw an exception.
The purpose of the catch statement is to provide error-handling code that handles an error gracefully.
One or more catch statements may follow a try block, dealing with specific types of exceptions.
Try block can generate exceptions // generate an exception catch (SocketException se) catch (Exception e)
Sometimes the programmer will want to execute statements regardless of whether or not an error occurs.
Putting cleanup code within a try block is not appropriate, as it will not be executed if an exception is thrown.
Instead, the finally statement should be used; it comes after any catch statements and the try block.
Try block can generate exceptions // generate an exception catch (SomeException some) // handle some exception.
Despite the best-laid plans, no application is foolproof and exceptions will be encountered at runtime.
This will, it is hoped, occur during debugging, rather than exceptions being accidentally discovered by users.
By catching and handling exceptions, applications will be robust enough to recover, and if not, to retire gracefully with an appropriate message.
In networking, the most common cause of exceptions is related to the state of the network connection.
Users connect to network services over a variety of communication mechanisms, of varying degrees of speed and quality.
When a network loses its connection to the Internet, or that connection becomes highly congested with traffic, it may be impossible to connect to a particular host and thus to its network services.
Or the user may be behind a firewall, preventing a direct connection from being established.
In our experience, these are the two most common causes of exceptions in network applications.
The next most likely cause is a security restriction, either imposed by the browser on applets or by a Java security policy or security manager.
When writing applets or software that uses security (such as distributed clients and servers), programmers may want to consider trying to catch any Security Exception that is thrown.
Though not mandatory, in that the compiler does not enforce it, it may be advantageous to do so if users are likely to change their security settings or run software within restricted environments.
However, a SecurityException is thrown only if code attempts to do something prohibited by the JVM—external security measures such as firewalls will simply result in an inability to connect to certain hosts.
The notion of system properties will be recognizable to readers, as most operating systems support a similar concept in the form of environmental variables.
Environmental variables contain control information, such as the path that dictates where an operating system will look for executable files.
Indeed, as part of the reader's installation of Java, an environmental variable was probably independently set: the classpath, which controls where the JVM will look for class files.
System properties, within the context of Java, are specific to a JVM rather than an operating system (so two different JVMs can be assigned two different sets of properties)
They can be used for a variety of purposes, such as controlling the configuration parameters of an application.
The most important use for network programmers involves the specification of a proxy server (covered in Chapter 1), to defeat firewalls that stop network software from working.
A value can be assigned to a system property in two ways:
When invoking a JVM, command-line parameters can be passed to it for the purpose of changing system settings.
There are a wide range of parameters that the JVM supports, controlling things such as memory allocation and whether just-in-time (JIT) compilation is enabled.
For the programmer's purposes, the most important thing is setting a system property, using the –D flag.
For example, to set a proxy server from the command line, the following command (modifying, of course, the application name and proxy settings) could be executed:
Setting a system property in this manner is, of course, dependent upon the user.
It also allows the user to "proxy-enable" his or her existing applications without modifying the original code.
To give the application control of the setting of system properties rather than relying on users, it is possible to modify system properties at runtime.
Accessing or modifying system properties is accomplished through the java.lang.System class.
To assign a new property, the System.setProperty method can be used.
For example, to set a proxy host and port the following could be done:
A complex network application intended for use in a commercial environment might offer a dialog box that allows users to customize proxy settings for their own firewall environment.
If a security manager is installed, however, it may not allow modification of settings.
When writing software for the Java platform, developers will need to rely on a variety of tools.
The choice of exactly which tools to use is largely personal.
The user interface of a tool that one developer likes might be frustrating to another developer.
For some projects, a particular feature will be called for, necessitating the use of a particular tool or development suite.
Rather than advocating a particular development tool for network programming, we leave it to the reader to evaluate which tools best suit him or her.
Below is a brief overview of some of the tools available for editing, compiling, and debugging Java software.
An integrated development environment (IDE) is a suite of tools that a developer uses to design, create, modify, compile, and test software.
Each IDE has its own unique user interface and set of features.
Before selecting an IDE, one should identify required features (such as JDK version) and download an evaluation copy to see if the user interface is amenable.
Since the package will be used for a large amount of time, developers should be satisfied before making such a purchase.
The following is a selection of commercial IDE packages available.
Borland JBuilder is a powerful and fully featured IDE that is available in both Windows and Unix editions.
Much of JBuilder itself is actually written in Java, and it fully supports the Java 2 platform.
With an easy-to-use visual form designer, code editor, and debugger, JBuilder is an extremely popular IDE.
A "community" edition, downloadable for free, contains most of the functionality a developer will need.
Visual Café, formerly a Symantec product but now produced by WebGain, is another popular IDE for Java.
Like Borland JBuilder, it offers a visual form designer and combined code editor and debugger.
However, Visual Café has the additional advantage of offering a variety of compilation options, including native machine code binaries for running on Windows machines.
The Visual Age for Java product, produced by IBM, is a high-level tool for developing enterprise applications.
As such, it carries with it a huge amount of functionality, ranging from servlet and Enterprise JavaBean components to more esoteric abilities such as support for IBM's WebSphere line.
A free evaluation version of Visual Age is available, and it is certainly worth a look with respect to managing large software development projects.
For this reason, many developers advocate not using Visual J++, as it is far too easy to lock your software into running only on Windows.
A relative newcomer in the IDE market, Forte for Java is an IDE from Sun Microsystems, based on an earlier product that Sun had acquired: NetBeans.
Forte for Java stacks up well against products like Borland JBuilder, and has a fully featured API offering code editing, visual design, compiling, and debugging.
It also has extra modules that can be incorporated, and a handy autoupdate feature.
The Forte line contains commercial products, but the community edition is freely downloadable.
The most important system development kit (SDK) available for Java developers is, obviously, the Java SDK, available from Sun Microsystems.
This is a freely available product, which may be downloaded from the JavaSoft Web site at http://java.sun.com/j2se/
Of course, there are additional development kits, from third parties and from Sun, that augment the existing tools and classes that ship with JDK.
Where appropriate, however, they will be mentioned in later chapters, in discussing additional Java networking functionality.
Readers of this chapter will have gained a better understanding of the essential components of Java.
Java is not just a computer programming language, nor is it just a software platform.
Java is a rich and powerful computing language and software execution environment, with a fully featured API class library that includes excellent networking support.
The many attributes of Java covered within this chapter make it a popular choice for network programming.
About the history, design goals, and properties of the Java language • About compiled bytecode, the Java Virtual Machine, and the wide assortment.
Internet Addressing Unlike local area networks (LANs), the Internet is a vast collection of machines and devices spread out across the nation and the world.
When there are hundreds of millions (and eventually many billions) of computers and devices attached to a network, the need to identify and locate a specific one is obviously important.
Indeed, one of the most fundamental concepts in network programming is that of the network address.
Without it, there would be no way of identifying the sender of a data packet or where the packet must be sent.
The theory behind such addresses was covered in brief, so as to give the reader a basic understanding of how addresses work.
This chapter will delve into greater detail, covering important topics such as IP addresses and domain names, and how these are represented in Java.
Readers with networking experience may be familiar with these topics, but likely will not have covered their representation in Java.
A new class is introduced from the Java API to cover the representation of an IP address.
Even readers comfortable with the theory will benefit from reading the practical sections of this chapter, as they form the foundation for the chapters that follow.
Devices connected to a LAN have their own unique physical or hardware address.
This assists other machines on the network in delivering data packets to the correct location.
The address is useful only in the context of a LAN, however—a machine can't be located on the Internet by using its physical address, which does not indicate the location of the machine.
Indeed, machines often move from location to location, in the case of laptop or palmtop computers.
Java network programmers do not need to be concerned with the details of how data is routed within a LAN.
Indeed, Java does not provide access to the lower-level data link protocols used by LANs.
Supporting the wide range of protocols available would be a mammoth task.
Since each type of protocol uses a different type of address and has different characteristics, different code would need to be written for each and every type of network.
Instead, Java provides support for TCP/IP, which can be thought of as the glue that binds networks together.
Individual machines have unique addresses for the transmission and receipt of IP datagrams, in addition to their normal network or physical addresses.
Devices having a direct Internet connection are allocated a unique identifier known as an IP address.
Dynamically assigned IP addresses are typically used when many devices require Internet access for limited periods of time.
Thus addresses can be allocated from a pool of remaining addresses on a case-by-case basis.
However, an IP address can be bound to a single machine only; it cannot be shared concurrently.
This address is used by the Internet Protocol to route IP datagrams to the.
Without an address, a machine cannot be contacted; hence, all machines must have a unique IP address.
The only exception to this is the case of a TCP/IP LAN, also known as an intranet.
Within the environment of an intranet, a shared range of IP addresses can be used, specially set aside for intranet use.
Anyone may bind a machine to one of these addresses; as they are not exposed to the public Internet there is no conflict with an external machine.
One must be careful, however, not to use the same IP address for multiple machines or devices within an intranet.
While computers read an IP address as a sequence of bits, people see them in dotted decimal format (for example, 127.0.0.1)
There are five classes of IP addresses (A through E), and each class is allocated an address range, as shown in Table 3-1
Each class of IP addresses is structured differently, allowing for greater versatility in how private networks and host machines are allocated (see Figure 3-1)
Private networks are allocated a network ID that is a unique identifier for a specific network.
Control of and responsibility for how machines within a network are allocated falls to the network administrator, so that host IDs can be assigned as needed.
The reason for a division of IP address classes that gives greater or lesser weighting to the host ID field is simple: each private network needs its own block of IP addresses, but allocating too large a block means that these addresses will be wasted.
With a finite range of addresses, this becomes particularly important as the number of allocated addresses increases.
Class A addresses, for example, have a very small network ID field but a large host ID.
This means that a private network with a Class A address can assign IP addresses to a large number of machines, whereas a Class C address can support a smaller number, but there are more network IDs available.
Figure 3.1 shows the breakup of network and host ID fields by class.
Note that two address classes (D and E) are not allocated a network ID field.
Class D is used for simultaneously broadcasting data to a large number of machines that are grouped together (a technique known as multicasting)
The central body responsible for allocating blocks of IP addresses is the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), building on the work of an earlier organization, the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)
A person setting up a private network would be allocated either a Class A, B, or C address, and could then assign host IP addresses to the machines on that particular network.
A discussion of the process of setting up a private network is beyond the scope of this book, of course, but readers interested in further information will find the ICANN and IANA organization Web sites useful, at http://www.icann.org/ and http://www.iana.org/
The most common way to obtain an IP address is to have one assigned to you by a network administrator, ISP, or other network service.
When you establish a dial-up connection, you will usually be assigned an IP address.
This address is normally dynamically assigned from a pool of available addresses, and when you reconnect you'll usually get a different address.
In an intranet, a network administrator may assign a specific address to your machine, or you may have a dynamically assigned address allocated by a Dynamic Host Control Protocol (DHCP) server.
Programmers should be aware of some special IP addresses as well.
The first, and most important from a network programming perspective, is known as the loopback or localhost address.
When writing and debugging network software, programmers often want to connect to the local machine for testing purposes.
Regardless of whether a connection to the Internet exists via a dial-up service or work is being done offline, the local machine may be accessed using the loopback address; this address is 127.0.0.1
Your machine may be known by many IP addresses in addition to the loopback address.
For example, you may be assigned an IP address when you dial your ISP, or your network administrator may have assigned an address for your intranet.
Programmers experimenting with writing networking software may find that it makes sense from a financial perspective to disconnect from their ISP and use the loopback address whenever possible.
Another set of useful IP addresses are those reserved for private networking.
In an intranet environment, it may be desirable to configure all machines with a unique IP address, without having them exposed to the public Internet.
The Internet Assigned Number Authority (IANA) has reserved three sets of addresses for use within a local intranet environment, as described in RFC 1918
If you plan on setting up a LAN of your own, you can pluck addresses from these ranges without worrying about a collision conflict with a host on the Internet.
On the Internet, routers will not forward data for these addresses, so they can be safely used locally.
It must be noted, however, that this is the only time when IP addresses can be safely picked, unless you are allocated a block of addresses.
While IP addresses comprise an efficient system for network administrators, most people find memorizing them to be an impossible task.
People generally find words much easier to recall than the dotted decimal format of an IP address.
It is easier to remember a name such as Amazon or Sun than a set of numbers designating such a dotted decimal IP address.
The domain name system (DNS) makes the Internet user-friendly, by associating a textual name with an IP address.
Any entity, be it commercial, government, or private, can apply for a domain name, which can be used by people to locate that entity on the Internet.
Simple text names, as opposed to arbitrary numbers, are used for identification.
In addition, organizations can allocate their own hostnames, such as ftp.davidreilly.com and www.davidreilly.com, without having to register every host with an outside body.
Once you have a domain name, you can control how it is used.
Many registries perform the service of registering domain names, at variable prices.
The original domain name registrar, Network Solutions, is located at http://www.networksolutions.com/
Given the vast number of machines connected to the Internet, the number of domain-name-to-IPaddress mappings is too great for any one system to handle.
Even if there were a large enough system to store all of these mappings, it would be quickly overloaded by requests.
Furthermore, in the event of a system breakdown, isolating the problem to a fraction of the Internet would be preferable to having the entire system grind to a shuddering halt.
Ironically, however, when the Internet was originally conceived, host-to-IP-address mappings were stored in a single file, called.
This file still exists in many operating systems and can be used to override DNS mappings or cover up ones that are missing or unresolvable by the local DNS servers.
In some cases, they can be used to cover up not having a local DNS server on an intranet.
The DNS (outlined in RFC 1034/1035) is a more sophisticated and robust system.
It can be thought of as a distributed database, in which responsibility for accepting new registrations, and returning the addresses of existing registrations, is spread out across many different hosts.
Different categories, such as commercial and educational, are handled by different registry servers.
Further more, international registries handle their own mappings (called cou try-code top-level domains), and can be subdivided into further categories.
This forms a hierarchical structure, a small subset of which is shown in Figure 3-2
Since the range of address categories changes rapidly, only a small number are shown.
This hierarchical structure is broken up by the type of address (either .net, .com, .gov, .edu, .mil, or one of the newer addresses such as .info or .biz) or by the country (.au, .uk, among many others)
For example, to access the site www.davidreilly.com, a request to resolve this name would be sent to the .com DNS server.
Some countries have their own way of organizing DNS records for example, as seen in Figure 3-2, the United Kingdom (.uk) uses .co rather than .com.
When software applications need to look up a hostname (such as ftp.davidreilly.com), they don't contact the .com registry directly.
Your network administrator, or ISP, configures your system to access the application's DNS server, which handles the lookup process.
Often, however, the DNS server doesn't even need to send out a query, as the same sites will be requested (either by multiple users or a single one)
This works much the same as a Web browser caching pages, and prevents excessive overload of the network.
When a request for a hostname (such as www.aol.com) is made, the operating system of the client computer contacts the local DNS server on the LAN.
It is responsible for locating the domain server aol.com, and interrogating it to find the IP address of the hostname (www.aol.com)
To do this, it must query the "root" level domain server, which refers it to the .com server.
Finally, the IP address is returned to the user (see Figure 3-3)
Request for www.aol.com reaches LAN DNS server and is resolved.
As can be seen from the example in Figure 3-4, DNS requests can be cached.
The LAN DNS server can maintain a cache of recently requested addresses, to prevent overloading of the rootlevel domains.
Furthermore, this improves network performance, as the delay between requesting a domain name and receiving a response is diminished.
By now it should be clear that a host on the Internet can be represented either in dotted decimal format as an IP address, or as a hostname such as ftp.davidreilly.com.
Under Java, such addresses are represented by the java.net.InetAddress class.
This class can fill a variety of tasks, from resoling an IP address to looking up the hostname.
In the next section, this important class is examined in detail.
The InetAddress class is used to represent IP addresses within a Java networking application.
Unlike most other classes, there are no public constructors for that of InetAddress.
Instead, there are two static methods that return InetAddress instances.
Those and the other major methods of this class are covered in the list below; all are public unless otherwise noted.
Note, however, that some machines can be known by multiple IP addresses, so this is not an absolute test for equality; what is tested is only that the two addresses are equal, not that they are the same machine.
The bytes are returned in network byte order, with the highest byte as bytearray[0]
While most machines will have a single IP address, there are some situations in which one hostname can be mapped to many machines and/or a hostname can map to many addresses on one machine (virtual addresses)
If the host cannot be resolved, or if resolving the host conflicts with the security manager, an exception will be thrown.
If the host cannot be resolved, or resolving the host conflicts with the security manager, an exception will be thrown.
Exception, java.lang.SecurityException— returns, as a static method, the IP address of the localhost machine.
If the IP address cannot be determined, or doing so conflicts with the security manager, then an exception will be thrown.
The first, and most simple, example of InetAddress is to find out the IP address of the current machine.
If a direct connection to the Internet exists, a meaningful result will be obtained, but.
The short example program given below shows how it is possible to determine the address.
System.out.println ("IP address : " + catch (UnknownHostException uhe) System.out.println ("Error - unable to resolve.
The LocalHostDemo application starts by prompting the user that an IP address lookup will be performed (this is important if there is any delay in determining the IP address)
The networking operation must be enclosed within a try/catch block, because it is possible that no IP address will be found and an exception will be thrown.
Below is a more complex example, which resolves hostnames to IP addresses and then attempts to perform a reverse lookup of the IP address.
System.out.println ("Hostname : " + catch (UnknownHostException uhe) System.out.println ("Error - unable to resolve.
In the previous example, we used a static method of InetAddress to return the local address.
Most commonly, however, we will be working with other systems on the network, so we need to learn how to use InetAddress to resolve their hostnames and obtain an IP address.
We then display the IP address and hostname, using the same methods in LocalHostDemo.
This application requires as a parameter either a hostname or an IP address.
There are other types of networking addresses represented in Java, such as URLs and remote object references.
To avoid confusion, discussion of these will be reserved for later chapters.
This chapter delved further into IP addresses and discussed domain names and how they are represented within Java software.
The InetAddress cannot be directly instantiated, but provides several static methods that can be invoked to obtain an InetAddress representing a specific IP address or hostname.
About the Domain Name System (DNS) and domain name suffixes (such as .com)
About the structure of an IP address and the various classes of IP addresses • About the InetAddress class and its various methods.
Communication over networks, with files, and even between applications, is represented in Java by streams.
Stream-based communication is central to almost any type of Java application.
The concept of streams is especially important when dealing with networking applications.
Almost all network communication (except UDP communication) is conducted over streams, so it is essential that programmers be familiar with this concept.
Readers with previous input/output (I/O) stream experience may choose to skim through this section, but will likely benefit from a revised look at the topic, as changes to streams were introduced in JDK1.1 to deal with text-based reading and writing.
A thorough knowledge of I/O streams is critical for almost any type of Java programmer, and is required for an understanding of the later chapters of this book.
In addition, since so much of network communication involves the transmission of text, knowledge of the new text readers and writers is also necessary.
A simple analogy is a pipe through which material such as water may be moved from one location to another.
Provided that the pipe is installed correctly, what goes in one end comes out the other (see Figure 4-1)
When designing a system, the correct stream must be selected; when building a system, the type of stream used is not important, as a consistent interface is provided.
The end effect of the stream, not how it was constructed, is of interest.
Streams may be chained together, to provide an easier and more manageable interface.
If, for example, the data needed to be processed in a particular way, a second stream could connect to an existing stream, to provide for processing of the data.
For example, bytes might be converted from one form into another (such as a number), or a stream of bytes may be interpreted as sequences of characters, as shown in Figure 4-2
In Java, streams take a flexible, one-size-fits-all approach—they are fairly interchangeable, and can be applied on top of another stream, or even several other streams.
Interchangeability is an extremely important attribute of streams, as it simplifies programming considerably.
Streams are divided into two categories—input streams that may be read from and output streams that may be written to.
Provided you don't try to read from an output stream, or write to an input stream, you can safely attach any "filter" stream (a stream that filters data in some fashion, such as processing it or converting it from bytes into a different form) to any lowlevel stream (such as a file or network stream)
Readers should be aware that, although streams are usually one-way, multiple streams can be used together (e.g., an input stream and an output stream) for two-way communication.
At the heart of network programming is the transmission of data and the sending of sequences of bytes.
A stream-based approach to communication simplifies programming, as a standard interface for data transmission is offered regardless of the type of data being sent and received, or of the mechanism by which data is sent across the network.
Of course, streams are not limited to networking—they can read from and be written to data structures, files, and other applications.
However, as will be seen in later chapters, there is more than one way to send data over a network, and I/O streams provide a consistent interface for working with network communication.
As mentioned earlier, streams provide communication of data at the byte level, and are used for either reading or writing.
Streams for reading inherit from a common superclass, the java.io.InputStream class, shown in Figure 4-3
Likewise, streams used for writing data inherit from the superclass java.io.
Instead, an appropriate subclass for the task at hand is created.
Several streams inherit directly from either InputStream or OutputStream, but most inherit from a filter stream.
Many input streams are provided by the java.io package, and choosing the right low-level stream is a fairly straightforward task, since the name of the stream matches the data source it will read from.
As shown in Table 4-1, there are six low-level streams to choose from, each of which performs an entirely different task.
There are other streams that programmers cannot create directly but that are nonetheless low-level streams.
A good example of such a stream is one that represents a network connection to a TCP socket.
You can create the socket, but not the input stream to read it.
These types of streams will be discussed where appropriate throughout the text.
Such streams are not directly instantiated by developers, and are instead returned by invoking a method of a networking object.
Low-Level Input Streams of the java.io Package Low-Level Input Stream  Purpose of Stream ByteArrayInputStream  Reads bytes of data from an in-memory array FileInputStream  Reads bytes of data from a file on the local file system PipedInputStream  Reads bytes of data from a thread pipe StringBufferInputStream Reads bytes of data from a string SequenceInputStream  Reads bytes of data from two or more low-level streams,
When a low-level input stream is created, it will read from a source of information that supplies it with data (see Figure 4-5)
Input streams act as consumers of information—they devour bytes of information as they read them.
That is, bytes are read from a file sequentially—subject to a few exceptions, once they have been read, you can't go back and read them again.
They haven't been erased; the stream has simply moved on to the next byte of information.
Reading from a low-level stream is done sequentially—you can't normally go back to the beginning and read again.
Of course, the sequential nature of input streams isn't necessarily a bad thing.
We wouldn't want to store the entire contents of a five-megabyte file in memory just so that a program had the option of going back to an earlier point in time.
However, some high-level filter streams support a limited push-back ability, allowing you to jump back to a specific point in the stream, on the condition that the point is marked.
This functionality is useful at times for looking ahead to see the contents of a stream, but is not supported by many filter streams.
A further point that readers should be aware of is that reading from an input stream uses blocking I/O.
Blocking I/O is a term applied to any form of input or output that does not immediately return from an operation.
For example, reading from a file will block indefinitely, until the hard drive is accessible and the drive read head moves to the correct location to retrieve a byte of data.
This is usually fairly quick, but if you're reading a byte at a time (rather than, say, a chunk of 1,024 bytes, or a kilobyte) then the number of read operations that may block can add up to some significant delays.
This can be alleviated, but not eliminated, by using data buffering, discussed later in the chapter.
The abstract InputStream class defines methods, listed below, common to all input streams; all of them are public.
More bytes may be available in the future, but reading more than the number of available bytes will result in a read that will block indefinitely.
Subclasses of InputStream usually override this method to provide custom functionality (such as reading from a file or a string)
As mentioned earlier, input streams use blocking I/O, and will block indefinitely if no further bytes are yet available.
When the end of the stream is reached, a value of –1 is returned.
This method returns the number of bytes successfully read, or –1 if the end of the stream has been reached.
Unlike the previous method, read(byte[] byteArray), this method begins stuffing bytes into the array at the specified offset, and for the specified length, if possible.
This allows developers to fill up only part of an array.
Developers should be mindful that at runtime, out-of-bounds exceptions may be thrown if the array size, offset, and length exceed array capacity.
Few input streams support this functionality, and may cause an IOException to be thrown if called.
These bytes are discarded, and the position of the input stream is updated.
Though unlikely, it is entirely possible that the specified number of bytes could not be skipped (for example, as stated in the Java API, if the end of the stream is reached)
The skip method returns the number of bytes skipped over, which may be less than the requested amount.
Below we examine a practical application of using a low-level input stream to display the contents of a file.
A byte at a time is read from the file and displayed to the screen.
Though not the most efficient way to do this (performance could be sped up by buffering, for example), it is illustrative of how low-level streams can be read from.
Repeat : until end of file (EOF) reached // Send byte to standard output.
Read next byte // Close the file catch (IOException ioe)
The code for this example is quite simple to follow, and shows just how easy it is to use input streams in Java.
Aside from error checking (such as the presence of a command-line parameter and exception handling), very little code is required to work with streams.
There is a single line of code to create the initial FileInputStream object, which takes as a parameter a string representation of the location of a file.
Once the stream is created, the source of the data is not important—it may be treated as an InputStream object.
That's the power behind object inheritance—because all of the input stream classes share a common superclass, they inherit the same method signatures to read and work with input streams.
The next step is to read the first byte of data and then enter a while loop.
The loop terminates when the end of the file is reached, and displays each byte of data to the user console.
Finally, the program closes the input stream and then terminates.
The power of streams in Java is clearly conveyed by this small number of lines of code.
Simply pass the name of a file to the program as a command-line parameter, and the contents of the file will be displayed.
For example, to display the file document.txt that is located in the current directory, the following command would be executed:
A number of output streams are available in the java.io package for a variety of tasks, such as writing to data structures including strings and arrays, or to files or communication pipes.
As seen in Table 4.2, six important low-level output streams may be written to (in addition to filter streams that may be connected to these low-level streams)
As mentioned earlier, there are other streams which may be written to that developers cannot create and instantiate directly, but that nonetheless will be encountered.
For example, a networking stream such as a connection to a TCP service is not created directly, but is provided by invoking the appropriate method on a socket.
These types of streams will be covered in later chapters, as appropriate.
Output streams work somewhat differently from input streams, as might reasonably be expected due to their different purposes.
While an input stream is a data consumer, an output stream is a data producer—it literally creates bytes of information and transmits them to something else (such as a file or data structure or network connection)
Like input streams, data is communicated sequentially; that is, the first byte in will be the first byte out (see Figure 4-6)
This approach is analogous to a FIFO queue, in which data that is sent may be read back in order, without regard to sequencing.
Unlike some specialized filter input streams, which allow you to "go back n" bytes within a sequence, once data is sent to an output stream it cannot be undone.
Consider it as like an e-mail message—once sent you cannot (no matter how much you may want to) take it back.
Output streams send data one byte at a time, sequentially.
PipedOutputStream  Writes bytes of data to a communications pipe, which will.
StringBufferOutputStream Writes bytes to a string buffer (a substitute data struc-ture.
System.err  Writes bytes of data to the error stream of the user.
System.out  Writes bytes of data to the user console, also known as standard output.
Bytes may be sent one at a time or as part of an array.
However, when bytes are read one at a time, individual byte writes may affect system performance.
Reading information can block indefinitely, but writing information may also block for small amounts of time.
This is not normally as significant an issue as the case of blocking read operations, however, as the bytes are ready to send.
Bytes to be read may not be immediately available, and are several orders of magnitude slower.
This problem can be avoided by using buffering, discussed later in the chapter.
The java.io.OutputStream class is an abstract class, from which all output streams (be they low-level streams or filter streams) are inherited.
The following methods are defined by the OutputStream class (all are public)
Pending data that has not yet been sent will be sent, but no more data will be delivered.
The method is particularly important for OutputStream subclasses that represent network operations, as flushing should always occur after a request or response is sent so that the remote side isn't left waiting for data.
The entire contents of the array (barring any error) will be written.
This method allows developers to specify just how much of an array is sent, and which part, as opposed to the OutputStream.write(byte[] byteArray) method, which sends the entire contents of an array.
Each output stream operates differently; for specific details, the Java API documentation should be consulted for the relevant class.
The simple example given below is sufficient to show how output streams are used.
It concerns an application that copies a file by reading the contents of the file and writing it, one byte at a time, to a new file.
Writing to an output stream involves little more effort than reading from one (particularly if only bytes are being sent)
This example reads from a file and writes to another.
To open a file for writing, a FileOutputStream is used.
This class will create a file, if one does not already exist, or override the contents of the file (unless opened in append mode)
Finally, both of the files are closed, and the copied file may now be read or modified by other applications.
Two parameters are required: the first represents the source file, and the second the destination for the duplicate.
For example, to copy the file document.txt that is located in the current directory to mybackup.txt, the following command would be executed:
While the basic low-level streams provide a simple mechanism to read and write bytes of information, their flexibility is limited.
After all, reading bytes is complex (for people, at least), and there's more to the world that just bytes of data.
Text, for example, is a sequence of characters, and other forms of data like numbers take up more than a single byte.
Byte-level communication can also be inefficient, and data buffering can improve performance.
Filter streams add additional functionality to an existing stream, by processing data in some form (such as buffering for performance) or offering additional methods that allow data to be accessed in a different manner (for example, reading a line of text rather than a sequence of bytes)
Filters make life easier for programmers, as they can work with familiar constructs such as strings, lines of text, and numbers, rather than individual bytes.
Instead of the programmer writing a string one character at a time and converting each character to an int value for the OutputStream.write(int) method, the filter stream does this for them.
Filter streams can be connected to any other stream, to a low-level stream or even another filter stream.
Each filter stream supports one or more constructors that accept either an InputStream, in the case of an input filter, or an OutputStream, in the case of an output filter.
Connecting a filter stream is as simple as creating a new instance of a filter, passing an instance of an existing stream, and using the filter from then on to read or write.
For example, suppose you wanted to connect a PrintStream (used to print text to an OutputStream subclass) to a stream that wrote to a file.
The following code may be used to connect the filter stream and write a message using the new filter.
This process is fairly simple as long as the programmer remembers two things:
Read and write operations must take place on the new filter stream.
The most common, and most useful, are shown in Table 4-3
The purpose of I/O buffering is to improve system performance.
Rather than reading a byte at a When an attempt is made to read subsequent bytes, they are taken from the buffer, not the underlying input stream.
This improves data access time and can reduce the number of times an application blocks for input.
DataInputStream  Reads primitive data types, such as an int, a float, a double,
LineNumberInputStream Maintains a count of which line is being read, based on.
PushBackInputStream  Allows a byte of data to be pushed into the head of the stream.
BufferedInputStream (InputStream input)— creates a buffered stream that will read from the specified InputStream object.
BufferedInputStream (InputStream input, int bufferSize) throws java.lang.IllegalArgumentException— creates a buffered stream, of the specified size, which reads from the InputStream object passed as a parameter.
This allows developers to specify a size, which can improve efficiency if large amounts of data are going to be read.
The buffer size specified must be greater than or equal to one.
A frequent task in any programming language is reading and writing primitive data types such as numbers and characters.
These information types are not easily represented as bytes (for example, some data types take up more than one byte of information)
Developers should not be concerned, how-ever, with the way in which representation occurs.
Instead, the data types can be read simply by invoking methods of the DataInputStream class, which handles the translation automatically.
Readers should be aware that only conversion from byte(s) to a data type is convert a byte value into a number.
DataInputStream (InputStream input)— creates a data input stream, reading from the specified input stream.
Many methods are added to the DataInputStream class, in order to facilitate access to new data types.
IOException— reads a byte from the input stream, and returns "true" if the byte is nonzero.
If no more data is available, an exception will be thrown to indicate that the end of the stream has been reached.
This byte is an actual byte is represented by an int value.
An exception may be thrown to indicate the end of the stream.
If no more data is available, an exception will be thrown.
IOException— reads eight bytes from the input stream and returns a double value.
If the end of stream has been reached, an exception will be thrown.
If the end of the stream has been reached, an exception will be thrown to indicate the end of the stream.
IOException— reads four bytes from the input stream and converts this to an int be read, an exception is thrown to indicate the end of a stream.
If no data at all could be read, a null value is returned.
Note that this method is deprecated as of JDK1.1, and if only text is being read, the programmer is advised to use a reader object (discussed later in the chapter) rather than an input stream.
If no data could be read, an exception will be thrown.
If the two bytes could not be read, an exception is thrown to indicate the end of the stream.
IOException— reads an unsigned byte and converts it to an int value.
If the end of the input stream was reached, an exception is thrown.
If the two bytes were not read, an exception will be thrown.
If the end of the stream is encountered, an exception will be thrown.
This is a static method, and will throw an exception if the end of the stream is reached.
If this is not possible (for example, if the end of the stream has been reached), an exception is not thrown.
Instead, the number of bytes read and discarded is returned as an int value.
Unlike the InputStream.skip(long) method, this method takes an int as a parameter.
This class provides helpful functionality by tracking the number of lines read from an input stream.
It is deprecated as of JDK1.1, however, since the preferred way to process text data is to use a reader class.
Also, line numbers are not very serviceable in terms of a stream of bytes.
Nonetheless, if writing for JDK1.02 systems, it may be useful.
LineNumberInputStream(InputStream input)— creates a line number stream, reading from the specified input stream.
The PushBackInputStream class allows a single byte to be read and then "pushed back" into the stream for later reading.
An internal buffer is maintained that allows data to be pushed back into the front of the input stream buffer, or added if the data had never been read from it.
This is useful when the programmer needs to take a "sneak peek" at what's coming—for example in a text parser or to determine what the next command in a communications protocol is going to be.
PushBackInputStream(InputStream input)— creates a PushBackInputStream that will read from the specified input stream.
PushBackInputStream(InputStream input int bufferSize) throws java.lang.IllegalArgumentException— creates a PushBackInputStream that will read from an input stream and use a buffer of the specified size.
If a value of less than one is specified for the buffer size, an exception will be thrown.
While there are plenty of filter input streams, a few useful output streams are available as well.
The most useful are presented in Table 4-4 and discussed in detail below.
As suggested by the name of the class, however, it buffers writes, not reads.
An internal buffer is maintained, and when the buffer is complete (or earlier, if a request to flush the buffer is made), the buffer contents are dumped to the output stream to which the buffered stream is connected.
Useful Filter Output Streams of the java.io Package Filter Output Stream  Purpose of Stream BufferedOutputStream Provides buffering of data writes, to improve efficiency DataOutputStream  Writes primitive datatypes, such as bytes and numbers PrintStream  Offers additional methods for writing lines of text, and other.
BufferedOutputStream (OutputStream output)— creates a buffer for writing to the specified output stream.
The default size of this buffer is 512 bytes in length.
BufferedOutputStream (OutputStream output int bufferSize) throws java.lang.IllegalArgumentException— creates a buffer for writing to the specified output stream, overriding the default buffer sizing.
The buffer is set to the specified buffer size, which must be greater than zero or an exception is thrown.
This is particularly important in networking, as a protocol request can't be sent if it is still stuck in the buffer, and the remote program may be waiting for a response.
Like its sister class, DataInputStream, the DataOutputStream class is designed to deal with primitive datatypes, such as numbers or bytes.
Most of the read methods of DataInputStream have a corresponding write method mirrored in DataOutputStream.
It implements the java.io.DataOutput interface, which provides additional methods for writing primitive datatypes.
DataOutputStream (OutputStream output)— creates a data output stream, which will write to the specified stream.
The class adds the following new methods, all of which are public unless other wise noted.
This string may be read back by using the termination and the presence of carriage returns or linefeeds.
The PrintStream is the most unusual of all filter output streams.
Aside from the change in naming convention (PrintStream versus the expected PrintOutputStream), it is atypical in that it overrides methods inherited from FilterOutputStream without throwing the expected java.io.IOException class.
The PrintStream adds additional methods as well, none of which may throw an IOException.
No errors are overtly reported, and instead the presence of be obtained as to the cause of the error.
PrintStream (OutputStream output)— creates a print stream for printing of datatypes as text.
PrintStream (OutputStream output, boolean flush)— creates a print stream for printing of datatypes as text.
If the specified boolean flag is set to "true," whenever a byte array, println method, or newline character is sent, the underlying buffer will be automatically flushed.
Instead of throwing an IOException, an internal flag is maintained that checks for errors.
While input streams and output streams may be used to read and write text as well as bytes of information and primitive data types, a better alternative is to use readers and writers.
Readers and writers were introduced in JDK1.1 to better support Unicode character streams.
The high ASCII characters represent characters and symbols such as those used in foreign languages or punctuation.
However, people quickly realized that even 256 characters were not enough to handle the many characters used in languages around the world.
Unicode characters are supported by Java, although many developers are unaware of their use.
This is a variable-width encoding format; some characters are a single byte and others multiple bytes.
For those wanting to learn more about Unicode and the importance of an international standard for character representation, the Unicode Web site has an impressive amount of information available at http://www.unicode.org/
Readers and writers are a better alternative than input streams and output streams when used on text data.
For those dealing solely with primitive data types, use of input streams and output streams may by all means be continued.
However, if applications are processing text information only, use of a reader and/or a writer, to better support Unicode characters, should be considered.
Programmers may notice compilation warnings when compiling code that warnings, however, and not errors.
If a good reason exists for use of a backward compatibility with older JDK1.02 virtual machines, then these warnings may be ignored.
A better alternative, if possible, is to use a reader method.
Internationalization may not seem like a significant concern for those of us with an English-speaking background.
However, in a growing global economy, internationalization may become more important, and the Y2K bug (which, while overrated, required significant cost and effort to repair) certainly taught us that software should be written with an eye toward the future.
The java.io.InputStream class has a character-based equivalent in the form of the java.io.Reader class.
The reader class has similar method signatures to that of the InputStream class, and existing code may be quickly converted to use it.
The class includes the following methods, all of which are public:
If the end of the reader's stream has been reached, a value of –1 is returned.
This method returns an int value, representing the number of bytes that were read.
If the end of the reader's stream is reached, a value of –1 is returned and the array is not modified.
This method returns an int value, representing the number of bytes read, or –1 if no bytes could be obtained.
Not every reader supports either mark or reset, and an exception could be thrown or the request ignored.
The skip method returns the number of characters successfully skipped.
Low-Level Reader Streams of the java.io Package Low-Level Reader  Purpose of Reader CharArrayReader  Reads from a character array FileReader  Reads from a file on the local file system, just like a.
FileInputStream PipedReader  Reads a sequence of characters from a thread communications.
StringBufferInputStream InputStreamReader Bridges the divide between an input stream and a reader, by.
Like input streams, there are a variety of low-level readers (which connect to a data source, such as a file or a data structure), and there are filter readers for high-level communication tasks.
Table 4-5 shows the important low-level readers of the java.io package.
The CharArrayReader class is a reader that (as is indicated by its name) obtains data by reading characters from an array.
This reader obtains its data directly from a local file, similar to the FileInputStream class.
Care must be taken, as with the FileInputStream class, when creating an instance of it, as an exception will be thrown if the file could not be located (or if security access permissions restrict it from being read)
FileReader(File file) throws java.io.FileNotFoundException— creates a reader that will access the contents of the specified file object, if the file it represents exists.
FileReader(String filename) throws java.io.FileNotFoundException— creates a reader that will access the contents of the specified filename, if it exists.
FileReader(FileDescriptor descriptor)— creates a reader that will access the contents of the specified descriptor handle.
This reader class is used to establish a pipe between one thread and another (for further information on this topic, see Chapter 7, "Multi-threaded Applications")
PipedReader(PipedWriter writer)— creates a connected pipe that will read the.
Any output that is sent by the piped writer may then be read by the piped reader.
While it is sometimes useful to work with a character array, most programmers prefer to deal with strings.
The StringReader class offers a substitute to the CharArrayReader, accepting a string as an input source.
StringReader(String stringToBeRead)— reads from the beginning of the specified string until the end.
While readers are quite common, there is still a need for backward compatibility with older input streams, particularly those written by third parties for which there is no equivalent reader class.
For example, the System.in member variable is an InputStream instance that can read input from a user.
The solution is to connect an InputStreamReader to an InputStream instance, which will perform the necessary translation.
InputStreamReader(InputStream input, String encoding) throws java.io.UnsupportedEncodingException— connects an input stream to the reader using the specified encoding form.
If the encoding form isn't supported, an exception is thrown.
To illustrate the use of input streams and readers together, we'll examine how an input stream may be converted to a reader for easy character reading without using a DataInputStream.
System.out.println ("Pleased to meet you, " + catch (IOException ioe)
We start by connecting an InputStreamReader to standard input (represented by System.in)
We connect a BufferedReader, to maximize performance, and then read a single line of text.
To run the application, type in your name at the prompt and hit enter.
Filter readers, just like filter input streams, provide additional functionality in the form of new methods, or process data in a different way (such as buffering)
Generally, but not always, they are extended from the java.io.
Filters may even be chained together (for example, connecting a BufferedReader to a custom reader, or vice versa)
Useful Filter Readers of the java.io Package Filter Reader  Purpose of Stream BufferedReader  Buffers access to data, to improve efficiency FilterReader  Provides a class to extend when creating filters PushBackReader  Allows text data to be pushed back into the reader's stream LineNumberReader Buffered reader subclass, which maintains a count of which line it is.
One of the most frustrating problems with reading data from a writer, as with an input stream, is that blocking I/O is used.
When attempting to read, the application will block until data is available.
This can last for a few milliseconds, a few seconds, or even worse, a few minutes.
When this happens frequently, the performance and responsiveness of software suffers.
An alternative is to buffer data so that reads are grouped together for better performance.
Just as the BufferedInputStream buffers bytes of data, the BufferedReader buffers characters.
Also, although one would not guess it from the name, the BufferedReader is a partial substitute for.
BufferedReader (Reader reader)— reads data from the specified reader into a buffer.
IllegalArgumentException— reads data from the specified reader into a buffer, which is allocated to the specified size.
The following public method is added by BufferedReader, as a replacement for the deprecated.
The line is terminated by a line separator sequence, such as a carriage return/linefeed.
Rather than perform a practical action, this class acts as a template on which other filters can be constructed.
If a custom filter needs to be written, the class should be extended, and methods overridden or new ones added.
The FilterReader class has been designed so that it cannot be instantiated by making its constructor protected; the class should instead be extended.
The FilterReader class defines no new methods, but subclasses are free to add additional methods or override existing ones.
This class allows characters to be "pushed back" into the head of a reader's input queue, so that it may be read again.
This allows programs to peek ahead at the next character and then push it back into the queue.
PushBackReader(Reader reader)— creates a push-back reader with a single character buffer.
PushBackReader(Reader reader, int bufferSize) throws java.lang.IllegalArgumentException— creates a push-back reader with a larger buffer, of the specified size.
The buffer size must be greater than zero, or an exception is thrown.
The following new methods (all public) are added in PushBackReader.
The LineNumberReader class provides a useful line counter, which measures how many lines have been read.
As it extends the BufferedReader class, it also supports the mark/reset operations.
Two new methods, to determine and to modify the line-number counter, are offered.
Going from an output stream to a writer is not a difficult task.
An equivalent class to java.io.OutputStream, the java.io.Writer class has similar method signatures and supports Unicode characters.
The following methods are included in this class; all are public.
FileOutputStream PipedWriter  Writes characters to a thread communications pipe, just like a.
PipedOutputStream StringWriter  Writes characters to a string buffer (not a string, as the name.
A buffered writer might not yet have enough data to send, and may be storing it for later.
Flushing sends this data immediately, and is particularly useful when working with networking streams, as a client might want to send data immediately when a command request is made.
There are many types of low-level writers (see Table 4-7)
Some of these have an OutputStream equivalent; others are brand-new classes that write to new output targets such as a character array.
The CharArrayWriter maintains an internal buffer that is added to each time a write request is made, and may be converted to a character array.
CharArrayWriter(int bufferSize) throws java.lang.IllegalArgumentException— creates a character array writer using the specified initial buffer size (which must not be negative)
The FileWriter class extends the OutputStreamWriter class (discussed later in this section), and provides a convenient way to write characters to a local file.
This class is equivalent to the FileOutputStream class discussed earlier.
FileWriter (File file) throws java.io.IOException— creates a writer connected to the resource represented by the specified file object, if not prevented by security permissions.
FileWriter (FileDescriptor) throws java.io.IOException— creates a writer connected to the specified descriptor handle, if allowable.
FileWriter(String filename) throws java.io.IOException— writes to the specified file location, creating a file if one does not already exist and overwriting an existing one.
If not permitted by security access restrictions, an exception will be thrown.
FileWriter(String filename, boolean appendFlag) throws java.io.IOException— writes to the specified file location.
If the appendFlag is set to "true," the file will be opened in append mode and data will be written to the end of the file.
The purpose of the PipedWriter class is to write data that will be read by a PipedReader.
These two classes are reader/writer equivalents of the PipedInputStream and PipedOutputStream classes, but may not be interchanged.
The reader may later read any data written to this writer.
If the pipe is already connected to another pipe, an IOException will be thrown.
Judging by its name, you might expect that this class allowed for writing to a string.
A string is of fixed length and is immutable (the contents of a string may not be modified)
New strings can be composed, concatenated, and assigned to a variable, but the contents of a string cannot be changed.
So the question is, how does one write to a string?
Writing to a string is accomplished by using a StringBuffer.
The StringBuffer class is similar to a string, but may be modified.
When the modifications are complete, the StringBuffer can be converted back to a string.
It maintains a string buffer, and provides a method to access the buffer contents or to convert to a string.
StringWriter(int startingSize)— creates a new string writer and allocates a.
The StringWriter class adds two new methods, both of which are public.
While there are many writer classes equivalent to output stream classes in the Java API, there is still a need to maintain compatibility with older output stream classes, as most of the networking API and some third-party libraries provide only stream interfaces.
The OutputStreamWriter class handles the translation between a Writer and an OuputStream, allowing new writer classes to interact with older output streams.
OutputStreamWriter(OutputStream output)— creates a writer that will translate between characters and bytes, using the default character encoding.
OutputStreamWriter(OutputStream output, String encoding) throws java.io.UnsupportedEncodingException— creates a writer that translates.
If the specified encoding form is not supported, an exception is thrown.
The example below demonstrates how a writer may be connected to an output stream by using the OutputStreamWriter class.
The code to convert from an output stream to a writer is extremely compact, and doesn't require much effort.
Flush and close the writer, to ensure it is // written catch (IOException ioe)
We start by connecting an OutputStreamWriter to standard output (represented by System.out)
Next, we write a line of text using our writer, and then flush the buffer so it is written to the user's screen.
Table 4-8 shows writers that act as a filter, by connecting to an existing writer stream and providing different functionality.
Strangely enough, there are no FilterWriter subclasses, but as the other classes perform filter-like functionality, they have been grouped together in the table.
The BufferedWriter is used to improve system performance, by buffering write requests together.
This can make for a more efficient system, as I/O-bound operations are notoriously slow (particularly when dealing with networking streams, which are several orders of magnitude slower than, say, a file stream)
By reducing the number of writes and grouping them together, I/O efficiency is improved.
BufferedWriter(Writer writer)— creates a buffered writer, con-nected to the specified writer.
BufferedWriter(Writer writer int bufferSize) throws java.lang.IllegalArgumentException— creates a buffered writer, with a buffer of the specified size.
The size must be greater than or equal to 1
Developers creating custom filter classes should extend this class, rather than extending the java.io.Writer class.
It provides no additional functionality, but may be used as a template on which filters can be constructed.
The FilterWriter class defines no new methods, but subclasses are free to add additional methods or override existing ones.
PrintWriter is the sister class of PrintStream, and provides the same methods for writing datatypes as text.
Like PrintStream, none of the methods may throw an IOException— boolean value.
PrintWriter(Writer writer)— creates a print writer, writing to the specified writer.
PrintWriter(Writer writer, boolean flushFlag)— creates a print writer, method or a line separator is sent, based on the state of the specified boolean flag.
A value of "true" will flush when a println method is executed.
The PrintWriter class implements new methods to match the signatures of the PrintStream class (see Section 4.3.3.3)
Data that can be read or written ranges from individual bytes to primitive datatypes and strings.
If you wanted to, for example, write a data structure (such as a sequence of data records, composed of individual fields) out to a file, you could do so.
But what if you wanted to store an entire object, composed of a series of member variables?
To do this would require that each field of the object be written individually; then at a later time, each field would be read back and assigned to an object.
This is a complicated process, particularly if some member variables are marked as private or protected.
Yet saving data is one of the most important functions of software—unless you're writing trivial applications, state information must be saved for a later time (and even games save data, such as high scores or save games)
Object persistence is the ability of an object to persist over time (and, if moved to a different computer or JVM, over space)
Most objects in a Java Virtual Machine are fairly short-lived.
When there are no references to an object, the memory space allocated to it is reclaimed by the automatic garbage collector thread.
If an object is frequently used, and does not lose references to it, it will still die at some point in time—after all, even in daemon processes that run for days or weeks on end, the JVM will terminate eventually and the object will be destroyed.
Object persistence allows an object to outlive the JVM that hosts it.
A custom class representing a key component of a system, a java.util.Vector list containing state data, or even a java.util.Properties object containing system settings, are all good examples of objects that might be important enough to be needed every time a program is run.
While the memory address space that is allocated to an object cannot be locked away for later use, the data stored there comprising the essence of an object may be stored elsewhere to be read and reconstructed at another date.
Entire graphs of objects may be serialized to an output stream.
Object serialization is the technique by which object persistence is realized.
Basically, object serialization controls how the data that comprises an object's state information (the individual member variables, whether public, private, or protected) is written as a sequence of bytes.
The serialized object might be sent over a network (enabling technologies such as remote method invocation, discussed in Chapter 11), or saved to a disk so that it can be accessed at some point in the future.
This allows objects to move from one JVM to another, whether located on the same machine or a remote one.
Serialization works by examining the variables of an object and writing primitive datatypes like numbers and characters to a byte stream.
But if an object contains an object as a member variable (as opposed to a primitive datatype), the story is somewhat different.
The object member variable would cease to function correctly if the object was left out, so the variable must be serialized as well.
If it contains an object or a collection of objects (such as an array or a vector), then they too must be serialized.
This must be done recursively, so that if an object has a reference to an object, which has a reference to another object (and so on), they are all saved together.
This happens transparently—developers do not need to manually specify which objects are to be written.
The set of all objects referenced is called a graph of objects, and object serialization converts entire graphs to byte form (as shown in 6-7)
Prior to this, no support for object persistence was offered, and developers had to write the contents of an object themselves.
This was an arduous process, as the developer would normally have to come up with a proprietary data structure, save all the wanted objects (recursively if necessary), and write code to restore the objects at a later date.
This was not a fun task, and any change to the objects (such as adding new member variables) required a change to the code to save and restore an object.
Now, however, any object that implements the java.io.Serializable interface may be serialized with only a few lines of code (along with any other object referenced by a serialized object)
Implementing the java.io.Serializable interface requires no additional effort on the part of developers, other than adding the appropriate "implements" statement during the class declaration and declaring a no-argument constructor (also referred to as the default constructor)
The interface serves only as an indication that the developer endorses serialization—no methods need to be implemented to support serialization.
The constructor is required so that the class may be instantiated later by the JVM, and then deserialized by assigning new values to member variables.
For example, the following class declaration identifies a serializable object.
Failure to declare a default constructor is, as the Java API documents state, an error in programming, and will result in an exception being thrown at runtime.
There are some legitimate reasons, too, for not supporting serialization.
For example, if an object contained very sensitive information, it might be unwise to serialize it and save it to disk or send it over a network.
Developers should be aware that no special care is taken to protect the contents of a serialized object from scrutiny or modification, and that any class in any JVM may choose to deserialize an object at a later time.
Of course, boycotting the serializable interface entirely isn't always an option.
For example, suppose a class stored password data that could be easily obtained elsewhere and would be dangerous to serialize.
To prevent individual member variables being serialized, they can be marked with the transient keyword, which indicates that the object or primitive datatype must not be serialized.
Consider the following class, which models a user's personal account that can be serialized but whose password field may not.
Other uses for the transient keyword are for fields that are being continuously updated by some means, such as a timer, and hence do not make sense to serialize, or for stopping the serialization of fields that store GUI displays of data.
The GUI display could be dynamically created, and hence there is no need to serialize it.
The main point of serialization is to write an object out to a stream and to read it back.
This is accomplished by using the java.io.ObjectOutputStream and java.io.ObjectInputStream classes, which can write serializable objects out to an output stream and read them back from an input stream.
The ObjectInputStream class is used to read a serialized object from a byte stream, to allow an object to be reconstituted back to its original form, providing the object's class can be loaded by.
The ObjectInputStream class implements the ObjectInput interface, which extends the DataInput interface.
This means that the ObjectInputStream class provides many methods with the same signature as DataInputStream, in addition to extra methods responsible for reading objects.
Few developers will want to override the ObjectInputStream class and create a nonstandard implementation.
ObjectInputStream(InputStream input) throws java.io.IOException— creates an object input stream connected to the specified input stream, which is capable of restoring serialized objects.
Many of the methods of ObjectInputStream were covered in the discussion of the DataInputStream class (see Section 4.3.2.2)
The reader is reminded that the ObjectInputStream can read primitive datatypes just like the DataInputStream class.
There are also several methods that pertain to the construction of ObjectInputStream subclasses.
Creating such a subclass is an extremely complex task, and not a normal part of Java programming.
For this reason, only the most important method of the ObjectInput interface is covered—for further information consult the Java API documentation.
If the object contains references to other objects, these objects are also reconstructed.
During the deserialization process, notification is given to any registered validation listeners of the success or failure of the process; however, the details of validation are beyond the scope of this book.
It is sufficient to say here that if an object cannot be read, the application will be notified by the method throwing an exception.
If required, this object can be cast to a specific class type before it is used.
The ObjectOutputStream class serializes an object to a byte stream, for the purpose of object persistence.
It may be connected to any existing output stream, such as a file or a networking stream, for transmission over the Internet.
Objects written to an ObjectOutputStream have all their member variables (such as primitive data types and objects) written.
If the object contains references to other objects, they too will be written, so an ObjectOutputStream can write entire object graphs.
A sequence of objects can be written or wrapped in a collection (such as an array or a vector) whose entire contents could be serialized with one call to the ObjectOutputStream.writeObject method.
Overriding ObjectOutputStream is not necessary, and readers are advised not to create subclasses.
IOException— creates an object output stream capable of serializing objects to the specified output stream.
Like the ObjectInputStream class, ObjectOutputStream offers extra methods that may be used by subclasses to implement object serialization.
However, this is a complex task and is rarely done.
For this reason, only the most important method, used for writing objects, is covered here—for further in formation, the Java API documentation should be consulted.
All variables that are not marked as transient or static will be written, providing the specified class is an instance of the java.io.Serializable interface.
Let's look at an example of an application that can save and restore state information by using the Java serialization classes.
Create a buffered reader for easy input System.out.println ("Checking for previous.
Cast back to a vector catch (ClassCastException cce) // Can't read it, create a blank one catch (ClassNotFoundException cnfe) // Can't read it, create a blank one.
This example is longer than other I/O programs from this chapter, as it presents a text-based user interface that allows items to be added to, or removed from, a java.util.Vector list.
Such code is fairly simple, but what is not so easy to understand is the serialization process.
The main difference between this example and other programs is that the list doesn't die when the application terminates—it is serialized to a FileOutputStream for later access.
When the application first starts, it checks to see whether the serialized file exists.
If so, the vector list is read back from the file, along with any object references by the vector list, by using an ObjectInputStream connected to a FileInputStream.
Just in case the object wasn't an actual vector (for example, if another application had modified the file), a ClassCastException is caught.
Cast back to a vector catch (ClassCastException cce) // Can't read it, create a blank one catch (ClassNotFoundException cnfe) // Can't read it, create a blank one.
This example demonstrates the use of serialization to save program state.
You can follow the menu prompts to add data, and then exit the program.
Run the program a second time, and you'll notice that it "remembers" the original state of the list.
Deleting the file list.out will erase the program's memory again.
To run the example, the following command would be executed:
The need for secure serialization becomes an important concern in systems that deal with sensitive data, control access to other resources, or transmit data over insecure network communications (such as the Internet, as opposed to a corporate intranet)
Some of the security risks can be identified as follows:
Each of these scenarios can be risky, depending on the nature of the program.
Changing the high score on a game might not be too serious, but changing a bank account PIN number or balance is very serious, and allows a system to be compromised.
In some systems such risks can be disregarded, but if not, there is a solution.
Transmission of sensitive objects (either to disk or across a network) could occur over an encrypted stream, providing an added layer of.
Security and encryption are complex topics worthy in their own right of book-length discussions, and are beyond the scope of this book.
When an object is written to an ObjectOutputStream, an extra member variable is sent that developers may otherwise be unaware of.
This variable is a stream unique identifier (SUID), which serves as an object version number.
For example, the following is the SUID for a particular class, and is represented as a long value:
The serialVersionUID field is used to determine whether a compatible class definition was found during deserialization that matches that of a serialized object.
In large systems, it might be possible for two versions of the same class to be used, and one of them may be incompatible.
For this reason, a SUID is added as a field, to enable a deserializing ObjectInputStream to check for a match.
The version number is a 64-bit number, based on a variety of class-specific factors such as the name of a class, methods, and fields.
This provides for a fair degree of certainty that no two numbers will be alike, even if classes are similarly named.
For more information on the exact composition of the SUID, consult the Java Object Serialization specification, available at http://java.sun.com/products/jdk/1.2/docs/guide/serialization/
Now, however, consider the problems that would occur if a class was modified and methods or member variables added or removed.
Since the object version number is based upon the methods and member variables of a class, the object's serialVersionUID field, generated automatically by ObjectInputStream, will change, rendering it incompatible.
Maintenance is an important part of any software development project, and if an application's save files are suddenly unusable because the developer decided to add an extra method or two, users of the application are not going to be happy.
The solution is for the developer to work out the serialUID field independently, and add it as a member variable of the appropriate class, to keep things compatible.
Of course, calculating such a long number oneself might be a little tricky.
It analyzes a class file and displays the value of its serialVersionUID field.
There are two ways to use the tool, and the easiest is the GUI version, which allows the field to be copied and pasted into the application.
To invoke the serial version tool, simply type the following (presuming you have added the correct path statement to point to Java's bin directory, per the JDK installation instructions):
You should see a window like that in Figure 4-8, which shows the serial version inspector in action.
Simply specify the classpath of each class you're interested in, and copy and paste the serialVersionUID field into your applications.
By adding the serialVersionUID field, you can make future versions somewhat compatible, as they share the same SUID.
Changes to method names can then be made, without invalidating previously serialized objects.
However, adding or removing member variables will still cause incompatibility problems.
The Java input and output package (java.io) provides developers with a comprehensive range of options for reading and writing bytes of data, as well as characters.
Once mastered, streams play an important part in application development, and particularly so in the case of network programming.
By applying filter streams, or filter readers and writers, to low-level streams, developers can read numbers, arrays, characters, strings, and other datatypes from a sequence of bytes, or write such datatypes to a new sequence of bytes.
The User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is a commonly used transport protocol employed by many types of applications.
Rather than reading from, and writing to, an ordered sequence of bytes (using I/O streams, as discussed in Chapter 4), bytes of data are grouped together in discrete packets, which are sent over the network.
Although control over the ultimate destination of a UDP packet rests with the computer that sends it, how it reaches that destination is an arbitrary process (see Figure 5-1)
The packets may travel along different paths, as selected by the various network routers that distribute traffic flow seemingly whimsically—depending on factors such as network congestion, priority of routes, and cost of transmission.
No two packets are guaranteed the same route, and if a particular route is heavily congested, the packet may be discarded entirely.
Each packet has a time-to-live (TTL) counter, which is updated when the packet is routed along to the next point in the network.
When the timer expires, it will be discarded, and the recipient of the packet will not be notified.
If a packet does arrive, however, it will always arrive intact.
Packets that are corrupt or only partially delivered are discarded.
Testing UDP applications in an intranet environment will yield various rates of packet loss (or none at all), due to the small number of hops a packet must make, and high bandwidth.
Internet-based UDP transmission is more likely to result in dropped packets, and testing only in an intranet environment is dangerous, as developers may be unaware of the effects of lost packets.
Given the potential for loss of data packets, it may seem odd that anyone would even consider using such an unreliable, seemingly anarchical system.
In fact, there are many advantages to using UDP that may not be apparent at first glance.
If the amount of data is small and the data is sent frequently (such as in the case of a counter whose previous value is irrelevant), it may make sense to avoid the overhead of guaranteed delivery.
Unlike TCP streams, which establish a connection, UDP causes fewer overheads.
If the amount of data being sent is small and the data is sent infrequently, the overhead of establishing a connection might not be worth it.
Real-time applications that demand up-to-the-second or better performance may be candidates for UDP, as there are fewer delays due to the error checking and flow control of TCP.
In addition, if some data is lost, it can be replaced by the next set of packets with updated information, eliminating the need to resend old data that is now out of date.
If several machines must be communicated with, then UDP may be more convenient than other mechanisms such as TCP (discussed in Chapter 6)
Some network protocols specify UDP as the transport mechanism, requiring its use.
Java supports the User Datagram Protocol in the form of two classes:
The DatagramPacket class represents a data packet intended for transmission using the User Datagram Protocol (see Figure 5-2)
Packets are containers for a small sequence of bytes, and include addressing information such as an IP address and a port.
The meaning of the data stored in a DatagramPacket is determined by its context.
When a DatagramPacket has been read from a UDP socket, the IP address of the packet represents the address of the sender (likewise with the port number)
However, when a DatagramPacket is used to send a UDP packet, the IP address stored in DatagramPacket represents the address of the recipient (likewise with the port number)
The choice of which DatagramPacket constructor to use is determined by its intended purpose.
Either constructor requires the specification of a byte array, which will be used to store the UDP packet contents, and the length of the data packet.
To create a DatagramPacket for receiving incoming UDP packets, the following constructor should be used: DatagramPacket(byte[] buffer, int length)
The DatagramPacket class provides some important methods that allow the remote address, remote port, data (as a byte array), and length of the packet to be retrieved.
As of JDK1.1, there are also methods to modify these, via a corresponding set method.
For example, a packet's contents can be replaced and then sent back to the sender.
This saves having to reset addressing information—the address and port of the packet are already set to those of the sender.
DatagramPacket was sent, or (if the packet is going to be sent to a remote machine), the destination IP address.
This can be less than the actual size of the data buffer.
Remember to make the buffer long enough, to prevent data loss.
Remember that the length must be less than or equal to the maximum size of the data buffer, or an IllegalArgumentException will be thrown.
When sending a smaller amount of data, you can adjust the length to fit—you do not need to resize the data buffer.
The DatagramSocket class provides access to a UDP socket, which allows UDP packets to be sent and received.
A DatagramPacket is used to represent a UDP packet, and must be created prior to receiving any packets.
The same DatagramSocket can be used to receive packets as well as to send them.
However, read operations are blocking, meaning that the application will continue to wait until a packet arrives.
Since UDP packets do not guarantee delivery, this can cause an application to stall if the sender does not resubmit packets.
A DatagramSocket can be used to both send and receive packets.
Each DatagramSocket binds to a port on the local machine, which is used for addressing packets.
The port number need not match the port number of the remote machine, but if the application is a UDP server, it will usually choose a specific port number.
If the DatagramSocket is intended to be a client, and doesn't need to bind to a specific port number, a blank constructor can be specified.
To create a server Datagram Socket, the following constructor is used, which takes as a parameter the port to which the UDP service will be bound: DatagramSocket(int port) throws java.net.SocketException.
Although rarely used, there is a third constructor for DatagramSocket, introduced in JDK1.1
If a machine is known by several IP addresses (referred to as multihomed), you can specify the IP address and port to which a UDP service should be bound.
It takes as parameters the port to which the UDP service will be bound, as well as the InetAddress of the service.
This constructor is: DatagramSocket (int port, InetAddress addr) throws java.net.SocketException.
DatagramSocket is used to receive incoming UDP packets and to send outgoing UDP packets.
It provides methods to send and receive packets, as well as to specify a timeout value when nonblocking I/O is being used, to inspect and modify maximum UDP packet sizes, and to close the socket.
The designation is a misnomer, as UDP doesn't actually create a "connection" between one machine and another.
However, if this method is used, it causes exceptions to be thrown if an attempt is made to send packets to, or read packets from, any other host and port than those specified.
This value is used to determine the number of milliseconds a read operation will block before throwing a java.io.InterruptedIOException.
By default, this value will be zero, indicating that blocking I/O will be used.
If a timeout value hasn't been specified by using DatagramSocket.setSoTimeout(int duration), this method will block indefinitely.
If a timeout value has been specified, a java.io.InterruptedIOException will be thrown if the time is exceeded.
SocketException— sets the maximum buffer size used for incoming UDP packets.
Whether the specified length will be adhered to is dependent on the operating system.
Whether the specified length will be adhered to is dependent on the operating system.
This value is the number of milliseconds a read operation will block before throwing a java.io.InterruptedIOException.
Before an application can read UDP packets sent to it by remote machines, it must bind a socket to a local UDP port using DatagramSocket, and create a DatagramPacket that will act as a container for the UDP packet's data.
Figure 5-3 shows the relationship between a UDP packet, the various Java classes used to process it, and the actual application.
When an application wishes to read UDP packets, it calls the DatagramSocket.receive method, which copies a UDP packet into the specified DatagramPacket.
The contents of the DatagramPacket are processed, and the process is repeated as needed.
When processing the packet, the application must work directly with an array of bytes.
If, however, your application is better suited to reading text, you can use classes from the Java I/O package to convert between a byte array and another type of stream or reader.
By hooking a ByteArrayInputStream to the contents of a datagram and then to another type of InputStream or an InputStreamReader, you can access the contents of UDP packets relatively easily (see Figure 5-4)
Many developers prefer to use Java I/O streams to process data, using a DataInputStream or a BufferedReader to access the contents of byte arrays.
Reading from a UDP packet is simplified by applying input streams.
For example, to hook up a DataInputStream to the contents of a DatagramPacket, the following code can be used:
The same interface (DatagramSocket) employed to receive UDP packets is also used to send them.
When sending a packet, the application must create a DatagramPacket, set the address and port information, and write the data intended for transmission to its byte array.
If replying to a received packet, the address and port information will already be stored, and only the data need be overwritten.
Once the packet is ready for transmission, the send method of DatagramSocket is invoked, and a UDP packet is sent (see Figure 5-5)
Do something else, like read other packets, or check to // see if no more packets to send .........
To demonstrate how UDP packets are sent and received, we'll compile and run two small examples.
The first will bind to a local port, read a packet, and display its contents and addressing information.
The second example will send the packet read by the first.
Create a datagram socket, bound to the // specific port 2000
Create a datagram packet, containing a // maximum buffer of 256 bytes.
Receive a packet - remember by default //this is a blocking operation.
Display only up to the length of the // original UDP packet break; else System.out.print ( (char) data) ;
Most of the code is self-explanatory, or is similar to code snippets shown earlier.
The application starts by binding to a specific port, 2000
Applications offering a service generally bind to a specific port.
When acting as a receiver, your application should choose a specific port number, so that a sender can send UDP packets to this port.
Next, the application prepares a DatagramPacket for storing UDP packets, and creates a new buffer for storing packet data.
Create a datagram socket, bound to the specific port 2000
Create a datagram packet, containing a maximum buffer of 256 // bytes.
The read operation is blocking, so until a packet arrives, the server will wait.
When a packet is successfully delivered to the application, the addressing information for the packet is displayed so that it can be determined where it came from.
Receive a packet - remember by default this is a blocking // operation.
To provide easy access to the contents of the UDP packet, the application uses a ByteArrayInputStream to read from the packet.
Reading one character at a time, the program displays the contents of the packet and then finishes.
Note that Unicode characters, which are represented by more than just a single byte, cannot be written out in this fashion (readers and writers would be more appropriate if internationalization support is required)
Display only up to the length of the original UDP packet break; else System.out.print ( (char) data) ;
Check for valid number of parameters System.out.println ("java PacketSendDemo return;
System.out.println ("Bound to local port " // Create a message to send using a UDP packet.
Get the contents of our message as an array // of bytes.
The second example uses UDP to talk to the first example.
This example acts as the sender, dispatching a UDP packet to the receiver, which contains an ASCII text-greeting message.
Though it uses some similar classes (DatagramSocket, DatagramPacket), they are employed in a slightly different way.
The application starts by binding a UDP socket to a local port, which will be used to send the data packet.
Unlike the receiver demonstration, it doesn't matter which local port is being used.
In fact, any free port is a candidate, and you may find that running the application several times will result in different port numbers.
After binding to a port, the port number is displayed to demonstrate this.
Create a datagram socket, bound to any available local port System.out.println ("Bound to local port " +
Before sending any data, we need to create a DatagramPacket.
First, a ByteArrayOutputStream is used to create a sequence of bytes.
Once this is complete, the array of bytes is passed to the DatagramPacket constructor.
Get the contents of our message as an array of bytes.
Now that the packet has some data, it needs to be correctly addressed.
As with a postal message, if it lacks correct address information it cannot be delivered.
We start by obtaining an InetAddress for the remote machine, and then display its IP address.
This InetAddress is passed to the setAddress method of DatagramPacket, ensuring that it will arrive at the correct machine.
However, we must go one step further and specify a port number.
In this case, port 2000 is matched, as the receiver will be bound to that port.
The final step, after all this work, is to send the packet.
This is the easiest step of all—simply invoke the send method of DatagramSocket.
Again, remember: there is no guarantee of delivery, so it is possible for a packet to become lost in transit.
A more robust application would try to read an acknowledgment and resend the message if it had become lost.
To run these examples, you'll need to open two console windows.
The first application to be run is the receiver, which will wait for a UDP packet.
There are no parameters for the receiver, so to run it use:
In a second window, you then need to run the sender.
This application could be run from any computer on a local network or the Internet (providing there isn't a firewall between the two hosts)
If you'd like, you can also run it from the same machine.
It takes a single parameter, the hostname of the remote machine:
As mentioned in earlier chapters, you can use localhost as the hostname to refer to the local machine.
The previous example illustrates the technical details of how an individual packet may be sent and received.
But applications need a series of packets, not just one.
The next example shows how to build a UDP server, a long-running system that is capable of serving many requests during its lifetime.
The type of service that is provided is an echo service, which echoes back the contents of.
The echo service runs on a well-known port, port 7, and if it is known that a system has an echo server installed, the server may be accessed by clients to see if a system is up and running (similar to the ping application)
The example below demonstrates how to write an echo client that will send packets to the server as well as read the results back.
Some systems have an echo service already running in the background, and security restrictions may prevent a service from binding to a well-known port.
If this is the case, you will need to change the port number to a different number (and in the case of security restrictions, you should select a number above port 1024) in both the client and the server.
The following example involves building an echo service, which transmits any packet it receives straight back to the sender.
The code uses no new networking classes or methods, but employs a special technique.
Though only one UDP packet will be processed at a time, the delay between receiving a packet and dispatching it again is negligible, resulting in the illusion of concurrent processing.
Max size of packet, large enough for almost any client.
Socket used for reading and writing UDP packets try // Bind to the specified UDP port, to listen // for incoming data packets.
System.out.println ("Server active on port " + catch (Exception e)
Echo the packet back - address and port // are already set for us ! catch (IOException ioe)
The following client can be used with the echo service and can easily be adapted to support other services.
Repeated packets are sent to the echo service, and a timeout is caught to prevent the service from stalling if a packet becomes lost, and the client then waits to receive it.
Remember that packet loss in an intranet environment is unlikely, but with slow network connections on the Internet it is quite possible.
Get an InetAddress for the specified hostname try // Resolve the hostname to an InetAddr catch (UnknownHostException uhe) return;
Create a packet to send to the UDP server DatagramPacket(sendbuf,
Catch any InterruptedIOException that is thrown // while waiting to receive a UDP packet try catch (InterruptedIOException ioe)
Obtain a byte input stream to read the // UDP packet ByteArrayInputStream (
Sleep for a second, to allow user to see packet try catch (IOException ioe)
Before clients can send requests, the echo server must be active.
Otherwise, UDP packets will be sent and then ignored, as there is no program running to read them.
However, the client will not stall if a response is not sent back; it will send packets again after two seconds of waiting.
To run the echo client (either on the same machine as the server or a different one), type the following:
Remember that on Unix systems, you must have root privileges to bind to a port under 1024
You can change the service port to a higher number, but this must be done in both the client and the server in order to recompile.
While the UDP is sometimes the best alternative for certain classes of applications, because of its unique properties, it does present some challenges to developers.
These challenges can be met, however, by structuring data transmission to overcome the limitations of UDP.
Below we examine these limitations and how they may be overcome.
Packets sent via UDP may become lost in transit—each additional hop between one router and another introduces more delays and increases the likelihood that a packet may be discarded when its TTL reaches zero.
Furthermore, UDP packets can become damaged or lost if the physical network connection they are being routed through goes down.
Since Internet packets are being transmitted across a public network, composed of a diverse range of network infrastructures, it is likely that packets will become lost at some point in a connection.
Of course, in some applications the loss of individual packets may not have a noticeable effect.
For example, a video stream might lose a few frames of picture, but provided that most of the frames arrive, the loss is bearable.
However, if a file is being transferred, then the file contents.
If guaranteed delivery is required, the best alternative is to avoid packet-based communication altogether and use a more suitable transport mechanism like the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), discussed in Chapter 6
Nonetheless, if the use of UDP is called for, one solution is for the party receiving packets to send an acknowledgment packet (also referred to as an ACK) back to the sender.
The absence of an ACK indicates that a packet was lost and should be retransmitted.
Some transport systems send back an ACK for individual packets or for a range of packets.
Although it does add additional complexity, acknowledgment of a range of packets makes for a more efficient use of bandwidth.
Some systems also use a negative-acknowledgment packet (NAK) to indicate that a specific packet was lost, which triggers immediate retransmission of that packet.
Applications that require sequential access to data (and let's face it, that amounts to most software) should include a sequence number in the contents of a datagram packet.
If a packet arrives out of order, it can be buffered until the earlier packets have caught up.
The face of the Internet is changing rapidly, as network connections move from dial-up and wireless modems to broadband communication through cable modems and ISDN lines.
Some systems can handle a large amount of data, whereas others still have extremely limited bandwidth.
To avoid flooding a system with more data than it can handle, the technique of flow control is used.
Flow control places a limit on how much data is sent, and helps to prevent systems from becoming overloaded (and bandwidth from being wasted)
Imagine flow control as a water limiter that restricts the amount of liquid flowing through a showerhead.
There are many flow-control techniques, ranging from limiting the number of packets sent per second to limiting the number of packets that have not yet been acknowledged.
The settings for the former are hard to determine, as they vary depending on the receiver.
The latter is probably the best choice—by limiting the number of unacknowledged packets, control is placed in the hands of the receiver.
If the receiver can get and respond to packets quickly, then more packets will be acknowledged and more will be sent.
If packets are flooding the network, fewer responses will come back and a throttle is placed on the flow.
Some systems may also elect to use a variable flow limit, which can be customized to take into account the length of time for acknowledgments to come back.
Since UDP doesn't offer direct control over flow control, for large-scale applications it may be appropriate to limit the number of packets sent to a host (for example, n packets per second, where n is a number suitable for the transmission line and speed of the recipient machine)
The User Datagram Protocol (UDP) provides a connectionless transport mechanism that allows packets of data to be sent to remote machines.
However, due to its lack of guaranteed delivery and sequencing, it creates additional work for developers, and thus the pros and cons of its use must be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Java supports UDP in the form of the DatagramSocket and DatagramPacket classes.
In order to send or receive packets, an application must bind to a local port using DatagramSocket.
The application creates a DatagramPacket with a sufficient buffer to store incoming or outgoing packets, and can then send and receive packets as required.
Transmission Control Protocol The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is a stream-based method of network communication that is far different from any discussed previously.
This chapter discusses TCP streams and how they operate under Java.
The properties of TCP make it highly attractive to network programmers, as it simplifies network communication by removing many of the obstacles of UDP, such as ordering of packets and packet loss.
While UDP is concerned with the transmission of packets of data, TCP focuses instead on establishing a network connection, through which a stream of bytes may be sent and received.
In Chapter 5 we saw that packets may be sent through a network using various paths and may arrive at different times.
This benefits performance and robustness, as the loss of a single packet doesn't necessarily disrupt the transmission of other packets.
Nonetheless, such a system creates extra work for programmers who need to guarantee delivery of data.
It establishes a "virtual connection" between two machines, through which streams of data may be sent (see Figure 6-1)
This connection provides an interface that allows streams of bytes to be sent and received, and transparently converts the data into IP datagram packets.
A common problem with datagrams, as we saw in Chapter 5, is that they do not guarantee that packets arrive at their destination.
Of course, it's always possible that network errors will prevent delivery, but TCP handles the implementation issues such as resending packets, and alerts the programmer only in serious cases such as if there is no route to a network host or if a connection is lost.
The virtual connection between two machines is represented by a socket.
Sockets, introduced in Chapter 5, allow data to be sent and received; there are substantial differences between a UDP socket and a TCP socket, however.
First, TCP sockets are connected to a single machine, whereas UDP sockets may transmit or receive data from multiple machines.
Second, UDP sockets only send and receive packets of data, whereas TCP allows transmission of data through byte streams.
They are converted into datagram packets for transmission over the network, without requiring the programmer to intervene (as shown in Figure 6-2)
The many advantages to using TCP over UDP are briefly summarized below.
Data transmission over TCP streams is more dependable than transmission of packets of information via UDP.
Under TCP, data packets sent through a virtual connection include a checksum to ensure that they have not been corrupted, just like UDP.
However, delivery of data is guaranteed by the TCP— data packets lost in transit are retransmitted.
You may be wondering just how this is achieved—after all, IP and UDP do not guarantee delivery; neither do they give any warning when datagram packets are dropped.
Whenever a collection of data is sent by TCP using data grams, a timer is started.
Recall our UDP examples from Chapter 5, in which the DatagramSocket.setSoTimeout method was used to start a timer for a But if an acknowledgment isn't received before the time runs out, the packet is retransmitted.
This means that any data written to a TCP socket will reach the other side without the need for further intervention by programmers (barring some catastrophe that causes an entire network to go down)
All of the code for error control is handled by TCP.
Since the data sent between two machines participating in a TCP connection is transmitted by IP datagrams, the datagram packets will frequently arrive out of order.
This would throw for a loop any program reading information from a TCP socket, as the order of the byte stream would be disrupted and frequently unreliable.
Fortunately, issues such as ordering are handled by TCP— each datagram packet contains a sequence number that is used to order data.
Later packets arriving before earlier packets will be held in a queue until an ordered sequence of data is available.
The data will then be passed to the application through the interface of the socket.
While storing information in datagram packets is certainly not beyond the reach of programmers, it doesn't lead to the most efficient way of communication between computers.
There's added complexity, and it can be argued that the task of designing and creating software within a deadline provides complexity enough for programmers.
Developers typically welcome anything that can reduce the complexity of software development, and the TCP does just this.
Rather than being packaged into discrete units (datagram packets), the data is instead treated as a continuous stream, like the I/O streams the reader is by now familiar with.
The mechanism is the same whether the developer is writing to a network socket, a communications pipe, a data structure, the user console, or a file.
This makes communicating via TCP sockets far simpler than communicating via datagram packets.
It is clear that there are significant differences between TCP and UDP, but there is also an port, which distinguishes one application from another.
Many services and clients run on the same port, and it would be impossible to sort out which one was which without distributing them by port number.
When a TCP socket establishes a connection to another machine, it requires two very the port number.
In addition, a local IP address and port number will be bound to it, so that the remote machine can identify which application established the connection (as illustrated in Figure 6-3)
After all, you wouldn't want your e-mail to be accessible by another user running software on the same system.
Local ports identify the application establishing a connection from other programs, allowing multiple TCP applications to run on the same machine.
Table 6-1 lists a few of the well-known services and their associated port numbers.
In addition, there is a special type of socket that provides a service that will bind to a specific port number.
This type of socket is normally used only in servers, and can perform the following operations:
These two sockets are grouped into different categories, and are used by either a client or a server (since some clients may also be acting as servers, and some servers as clients)
However, it is normal practice for the role of client and server to be separate.
In network programming (and often in other forms of communication, such as database programming), applications that use sockets are divided into two categories, the client and the server.
You are probably familiar with the phrase client/server programming, although the exact meaning of the phrase may be unclear to you.
The client/server paradigm divides software into two categories, clients and servers.
A client is software that initiates a connection and sends requests, whereas a server is software that listens for connections and processes requests.
In the context of UDP programming, no actual connection is established, and UDP applications may both initiate and receive requests on the same socket.
In the context of TCP, where connections are established between machines, the client/server paradigm is much more relevant.
When software acts as a client, or as a server, it has a rigidly defined role that fits easily into a familiar mental model.
Either the software is initiating requests, or it is processing them.
Switching between these roles makes for a more complex system.
Even if switching is permitted, at any given time one software program must be the client and one software program must be the server.
If they both try to be clients at the same time, no server exists to process the requests!
The client/server paradigm is an important theoretical concept that is widely used in practical applications.
There are other communications models as well, such as peer to peer, in which either party may initiate communication.
However, the client/server concept is a popular choice due to its simplicity and is used in most network programming.
Network clients initiate connections and usually take charge of network transactions.
The server is there to fulfill the requests of the client—a client does not fulfill the requests of a server.
Although the client is in control, some power still resides in the server, of course.
A client can tell a server to delete all files on the local file system, but the server isn't necessarily compelled to carry out that action (thankfully!)
The network client speaks to the server using an agreed-upon standard for communication, the network protocol.
For example, an HTTP client uses a set of commands different from a mail client, and has a completely different purpose.
Connecting an HTTP client to a mail server, or a mail client to an HTTP server, will result not only in an error message but in an error message that the client will not understand.
For this reason, as part of the protocol specification, a port number is used so that the client can locate the server.
The role of the network server is to bind to a specific port (which is used by the client to locate the server), and to listen for new connections.
While the client is temporary, and runs only when the user chooses, the server must run continually (even if no clients are actually connected) in the hope that someone, at some time, will want its services.
The server is often referred to as a daemon process, to use Unix parlance.
It runs indefinitely, and is normally automatically started when the host computer of the server is started.
So the server waits, and waits, and waits, until a client establishes a connection to the server port.
Some servers can handle only a single connection at a time, while others can handle many connections concurrently, through the use of threads.
When a connection is being processed, the server is submissive.
It waits for the client to send requests, and dutifully processes them (though the server is free to respond with an error message, particularly if the request violates some important precept of the protocol or presents a security risk)
Servers will answer the client request by sending either a response or an error message—the format of which varies from protocol to protocol.
Learning a network protocol (when writing either a client or a server) is a little like learning a new language, as the syntax changes.
Typically, though, the number of commands is much smaller, making things a little easier.
The behavior of the server is determined in part by the protocol and in part by the developer.
Some commands may be optional, and are not always supported by server implementations.)
Java offers good support for TCP sockets, in the form of two socket classes, java.net.Socket and java.net.ServerSocket.
When writing client software that connects to an existing service, the Socket class should be used.
When writing server software that binds to a local port in order to provide a service, the ServerSocket class should be employed.
This is different from the way a DatagramSocket works with UDP—the function of connecting to servers, and the function of accepting data from clients, is split into a separate class under TCP.
The Socket class represents client sockets, and is a communication channel between two TCP communications ports belonging to one or two machines.
A socket may connect to a port on the local system, avoiding the need for a second machine, but most network software will usually involve two machines.
If this functionality is required, a client application should establish multiple socket connections, one for each machine.
Two constructors, which allowed a boolean parameter to specify whether UDP or TCP sockets were to be used, have been deprecated.
The easiest way to create a socket is to specify the hostname of the machine and the port of the service.
For example, to connect to a Web server on port 80, the following code might be used:
However, a wide range of constructors is available, for different situations.
Developers should not normally use this method, as it does not allow a hostname or port to be specified.
Socket (InetAddress address int port) throws java.io.IOException, java.lang.SecurityException— creates a socket connected to the specified IP address and port.
If a connection cannot be established, or if connecting to that host violates a security restriction (such as when an applet tries to connect to a machine other than the machine from which it was loaded), an exception is thrown.
Socket (InetAddress address, int port, InetAddress localAddress int localPort) throws java.io.IOException, java.lang.SecurityException— creates a socket connected to the specified address and port, and is bound to the specified local address and local port.
By default, a free port is used, but this method allows you to specify a specific port number, as well as a specific address, in the case of multihomed hosts (i.e., a machine where the localhost is known by two or more IP addresses)
Developers should not normally use this method, as it does not allow a hostname or port to be specified.
Socket (String host, int port) throws java.net.UnknownHostException, java.io.IOException, java.lang.SecurityException— creates a socket connected to the specified host.
This method allows a string to be specified, rather than an InetAddress.
If the hostname could not be resolved, a connection could not be established, or a security restriction is violated, an exception is thrown.
Socket (String host, int port, InetAddress localAddress, int localPort) throws java.net.UnknownHostException, java.io.
IOException, java.lang.SecurityException— creates a socket connected to the specified host and port, and bound to the specified local port and address.
This allows a hostname to be specified as a string, and not an InetAddress instance, as well as allowing a specific local address and port to be bound to.
These local parameters are useful for multihomed hosts (i.e., a machine where the localhost is known by two or more IP addresses)
If the hostname can't be resolved, a connection cannot be established, or a security restriction is violated, an exception is thrown.
Under normal circumstances, a socket is connected to a machine and port when it is created.
Although there is a blank constructor that does not require a hostname or port, it is protected and allows you to specify these details at a later point in time, so under normal circumstances the socket will be connected when created.
If the network is fine, the call to a socket constructor will return as soon as a connection is established, but if the remote machine is not responding, the constructor method may block for an indefinite amount of time.
This varies from system to system, depending on a variety of factors such as the operating system being used and the default network timeout (some machines on a local intranet, for example, seem to respond faster than some Internet machines, depending on network settings)
You can't ever guarantee how long a socket may block for, but this is abnormal behavior and won't happen frequently.
Nonetheless, in mission-critical systems it may be appropriate to place such calls in a second thread, to prevent an application from stalling.
At a lower level, sockets are produced by a socket factory, which is a special class responsible for creating the appropriate socket implementation.
Under normal circumstances, a standard java.net.Socket will be produced, but in special situations, such as special networking environments in which custom sockets are used (for example, to break through a firewall by using a special proxy server), socket factories may actually return a socket subclass.
The details of socket factories are best left to experienced developers who are familiar with the intricacies of Java networking and have a definite purpose for creating custom sockets and socket factories.
For more information on this topic, consult the Java API documentation for the java.net.SocketFactory and java.net.SocketImplFactory class.
Sockets can perform a variety of tasks, such as reading information, sending data, closing a connection, and setting socket options.
In addition, the following methods are provided to obtain information about a socket, such as address and port locations:
Closing a connect may or may not allow remaining data to be sent, depending on the.
Developers are advised to flush any output streams before closing a socket connection.
If a value of 0 is returned, the timer is disabled and a thread will block indefinitely (until data is available or the stream is terminated)
Not every system will support this functionality or allows absolute control over this feature.
If you want to buffer incoming data, you're advised to instead use a BufferedInputStream or a BufferedReader.
Not every system will support this functionality or allows absolute control over this feature.
If you want to buffer incoming data, you're advised to instead use a BufferedOutputStream or a BufferedWriter.
Only one factory can be specified, and this factory will be used whenever a socket is created.
If a negative value is specified, an exception is thrown.
If a timeout does occur, a java.io.IOInterruptedException is thrown whenever a read operation occurs on the socket's input stream.
This is distinct from the internal TCP timer, which triggers a resend of unacknowledged datagram packets (see Section 6.1.1.1 on error control)
Further reads to the input stream will encounter the end of the stream marker.
Any data previously written, but not yet sent, will be flushed, followed by a TCP connection-termination sequence, which notifies the application that no more data will be available (and in the case of a Java application, that the end of the stream has been reached)
Further writes to the socket will cause an IOException to be thrown.
Creating client software that uses TCP for communication is extremely easy in Java, no matter what operating system is being used.
The Java Networking API provides a consistent, platformneutral interface that allows client applications to connect to remote services.
Once a socket is created, it is connected and ready to read/write by using the socket's input and output streams.
A filter can easily be connected to a socket stream, to make for simpler programming.
The following code snippet demonstrates a simple TCP client that connects a BufferedReader to the socket input stream, and a PrintStream to the socket output stream.
Socket options are settings that modify how sockets work, and they can affect (both positively and negatively) the performance of applications.
Generally, socket options should not be changed unless there is a good reason for doing so, as changes may negatively affect application and network performance (for example, enabling Nagle's algorithm may increase performance of telnet type applications but lower the available bandwidth)
The keepalive socket option is controversial; its use is a topic that some developers feel very strongly about.
By default, no data is sent between two connected sockets unless an application has data to send.
This means that an idle socket may not have data submitted for minutes, hours, or even days in the case of long-lived processes.
Suppose, however, that a client crashes, and the end-of-connection sequence is not sent to a TCP server.
Valuable resources (CPU time and memory) might be wasted on a client that will never respond.
When the keepalive socket option is enabled, the other end of the socket is probed to verify it is still active.
However, the application doesn't have any control over how often keepalive probes are sent.
To enable keepalive, the Socket.setSoKeepAlive(boolean) method is called with a value of "true" (a value of "false" will disable it)
For example, to enable keepalive on a socket, the following code would be used.
Although keepalive does have some advantages, many developers advocate controlling timeouts and dead sockets at a higher level, in application code.
It should also be kept in mind that keepalive doesn't allow you to specify a value for probing socket endpoints.
A better solution than keepalive, and one that developers are advised to use, is to instead modify the timeout socket option.
The receive buffer socket option controls the buffer used for receiving data.
Changes can be made to the size by calling the Socket.setReceiveBufferSize(int) method.
For example, to increase the receive buffer size to 4,096 bytes, the following code would be used.
Note that a request to modify the size of the receive buffer does not guarantee that it will change.
For example, some operating systems may not allow this socket option to be modified, and will ignore any changes to the value.
The current buffer size can be determined by invoking the BufferedInput Stream/Buffered Reader.
The send buffer socket option controls the size of the buffer used for sending data.
By calling the Socket.setSendBufferSize(int) method, you can attempt to change the buffer size, but requests to change the size may be rejected by the operating system.
To determine the size of the current send buffer, you can call the Socket.
Changing buffer size will be more effective with the DatagramSocket class.
When buffering writes, the preferable choice is to use a BufferedOutputStream or a BufferedWriter.
When a TCP socket connection is closed, it is possible that data may be queued for delivery and not yet sent (particularly if an IP datagram becomes lost in transit and must be resent)
The linger socket option controls the amount of time during which unsent data may be sent, after which it is discarded completely.
It is possible to enable/disable the linger option entirely, or to modify the duration of a linger, by using the Socket.setSoLinger(boolean onFlag, int duration) method:
This socket option is a flag, the state of which controls whether Nagle's algorithm (RFC 896) is enabled or not.
Because TCP data is sent over the network using IP datagrams, a fair bit of overhead exists for each packet, such as IP and TCP header information.
If only a few bytes at a time are sent in each packet, the size of the header information will far exceed that of the data.
On a local area network, the extra amount of data sent probably won't amount to much, but on the Internet, where hundreds, thousands, or even millions of clients may be sending such packets through individual routers, this adds up to a significant amount of bandwidth consumption.
The solution is Nagle's algorithm, which states that TCP may send only one datagram at a time.
When an acknowledgment comes back for each IP datagram, a new packet is sent containing any data that has been queued up.
This limits the amount of bandwidth being consumed by packet header information, but at a not insignificant cost—network latency.
Since data is being queued, it isn't dispatched immediately, so systems that require quick response times such as X-Windows or telnet are slowed.
Disabling Nagle's algorithm may improve performance, but if used by too many clients, network performance is reduced.
Nagle's algorithm is enabled or disabled by invoking the Socket.setTcpNoDelay (boolean state) method.
For example, to deactivate the algorithm, the following code would be used:
To determine the state of Nagle's algorithm and the TCP_NODELAY flag, the.
By default, I/O operations (be they file- or network-based) are blocking.
An attempt to read data from an InputStream will wait indefinitely until input arrives.
If the input never arrives, the application stalls and in most cases becomes unusable (unless multithreading is used)
Users are not fond of unresponsive applications, and find such application behavior annoying, to say the least.
A more robust application will anticipate such problems and take corrective action.
In a local intranet environment during testing, network problems are rare, but on the Internet stalled applications are probable.
Server applications are not immune—a server connection to a client uses the Socket class as well, and can just as easily stall.
For this reason, all applications (be they client or server) should handle network timeouts gracefully.
When the SO_TIMEOUT option is enabled, any read request to the InputStream of a socket starts a timer.
When no data arrives in time and the timer expires, a java.io.InterruptedIOException is thrown, which can be caught to check for a timeout.
What happens then is up to the application developer— a retry attempt might be made, the user might be notified, or the connection aborted.
The duration of the timer is controlled by calling the Socket.
For example, to set a five-second timeout, the following code would be used:
Once enabled, any attempt to read could potentially throw an InterruptedIOException, which is extended from the java.io.IOException class.
Since read attempts can already throw an IOException, no further code is required to handle the exception—however, some applications may want to specifically trap timeout-related exceptions, in which case an additional exception handler may be added.
A value of zero indicates that timeouts are disabled, and read operations will block indefinitely.
Having discussed the functionality of the Socket class, we will now examine a complete TCP client.
The client we'll look at here is a daytime client, which, as its name suggests, connects to a daytime server to read the current day and time.
Establishing a socket connection and reading from it is a fairly simple process, requiring very little code.
Not every machine has a daytime server running, but a Unix server would be a good system to run the client against.
If you do not have access to a Unix server, code for a TCP daytime server is given in Section 6.7—the client can be run against it.
The daytime application is straightforward, and uses concepts discussed earlier in the chapter.
A socket is created, an input stream is obtained, and timeouts are enabled in the rare event that a server as simple as daytime fails during a connection.
Rather than connecting a filtered stream, a buffered reader is connected to the socket input stream, and the results are displayed to the user.
This is about as simple a socket client as you can get—complexity comes from implementing network protocols, not from network-specific coding.
Simply specify the hostname of a machine running the daytime service as a command-line parameter and run it.
If you use a nonstandard port for the daytime server (discussed later), remember to change the port number in the client and recompile.
For example, to run the client against a server running on the local machine, the following command would be used:
The daytime server must be running, or the client will be unable to establish a connection.
If you're using, for example, a Wintel system, instead of Unix, then you'll need to run the DaytimeServer from later in this chapter.
A special type of socket, the server socket, is used to provide TCP services.
Client sockets bind to any free port on the local machine, and connect to a specific server port and host.
The difference with server sockets is that they bind to a specific port on the local machine, so that remote clients may locate a service.
Client socket connections will connect to only one machine, whereas server sockets are capable of fulfilling the requests of multiple clients.
The way it works is simple—clients are aware of a service running on a particular port (usually the port number is well known, and used for particular protocols, but servers may run on nonstandard port numbers as well)
They establish a connection, and within the server, the connection is accepted.
Multiple connections can be accepted at the same time, or a server may choose to accept only one connection at any given moment.
Once accepted, the connection is represented as a normal socket, in the form of a Socket object—once you have mastered the.
Socket class, it becomes almost as simple to write servers as it does clients.
The only difference between a server and a client is that the server binds to a specific port, using a ServerSocket object.
This ServerSocket object acts as a factory for client connections—you don't need to create instances of the Socket class yourself.
These connections are modeled as a normal socket, so you can connect input and output filter streams (or even a reader and writer) to the connection.
Once a server socket is created, it will be bound to a local port and ready to accept incoming connections.
When clients attempt to connect, they are placed into a queue.
Once all free space in the queue is exhausted, further clients will be refused.
The simplest way to create a server socket is to bind to a local address, which is specified as the only parameter, using a constructor.
For example, to provide a service on port 80 (usually used for Web servers), the following snippet of code would be used:
This is the simplest form of the ServerSocket constructor, but there are several others that allow additional customization.
SecurityException— binds the server socket to the specified port number, so that remote clients may locate the TCP service.
If a value of zero is passed, any free port will be used—however, clients will be unable to access the service unless notified somehow of the port number.
By default, the queue size is set to 50, but an alternate constructor is provided that allows modification of this setting.
If the port is already bound, or security restrictions (such as security polices or operating system restrictions on well-known ports) prevent access, an exception is thrown.
IOException, java.lang.SecurityException— binds the server socket to the specified port number and allocates sufficient space to the queue to support the specified number of client sockets.
This is an overloaded version of the ServerSocket(int port) constructor, and if the port is already bound or security restrictions prevent access, an exception is thrown.
ServerSocket(int port, int numberOfClients, InetAddress address) throws java.io.IOException, java.lang.SecurityException— binds the server socket to the specified port number, and allocates sufficient space to the queue to support the specified number of client sockets.
This is an overloaded version of the ServerSocket(int port, int numberOfClients) constructor that allows a server socket to bind to a specific IP address, in the case of a multihomed machine.
For example, a machine may have two network cards, or may be configured to represent itself as several machines by using virtual IP addresses.
If the port is already bound or security restrictions prevent access, an exception is thrown.
While the Socket class is fairly versatile, and has many methods, the Server Socket class doesn't really do that much, other than accept connections and act as a factory for Socket objects method, which accepts client connection requests, but there are several others that developers may find useful.
Exception— waits for a client to request a connection to the server socket, and accepts it.
This is a blocking I/O operation, and will not return until a connection is made (unless the timeout socket option is set)
When a connection is established, it will be returned as a Socket object.
When accepting connections, each client request will be verified by the default security manager, which makes it possible to accept certain IP addresses and block others, causing an exception to be thrown.
However, servers do not need to rely on the security manager to block or terminate connections—the identity of a client can be.
If a value of zero is returned, the accept operation blocks indefinitely.
Few developers will want to subclass the ServerSocket, and using this should be avoided unless required.
Security Exception — assigns a server socket factory for the JVM.
This is a static method, and should be called only once during the lifetime of a JVM.
If assigning a new socket factory is prohibited, or one has already been assigned, an exception is thrown.
When the timer expires, a java.io.InterruptedIOException is thrown, which allows a server to then take further actions.
The most important function of a server socket is to accept client sockets.
Once a client socket is obtained, the server can perform all the "real work" of server programming, which involves reading from and writing to the socket to implement a network protocol.
The exact data that is sent or received is dependent on the details of the protocol.
For example, a mail server that provides access to stored messages would listen to commands and send back message contents.
A telnet server would listen for keystrokes and pass these to a log-in shell, and send back output to the network client.
The following snippet shows how client sockets are accepted, and how I/O streams may be connected to the client:
Perform a blocking read operation, to read the next socket // connection.
Connect a filter reader and writer to the stream InputStreamReader OutputStreamWriter.
From then on, the server may conduct the tasks needed to process and respond to client requests, or may choose to leave this task for code executing in another thread.
Remember that just like any other form of I/O operation in Java, code will block indefinitely while reading a response from a client—so to service multiple clients concurrently, threads must be used.
In simple cases, however, multiple threads of execution may not be necessary, particularly if requests are responded to quickly and take little time to process.
Creating fully-fledged client/server applications that implement popular Internet protocols involves a fair amount of effort, especially for those new to network programming.
It also draws on other skills, such as multi-threaded programming, discussed in the next chapter.
For now, we'll focus on a simple, bare-bones TCP server that executes as a single-threaded application.
One of the most enjoyable parts of networking is writing a network server.
Clients send requests and respond to data sent back, but the server performs most of the real work.
This next example is of a daytime server (which you can test using the client described in Section 6.5)
Bind to the service port, to grant clients // access to the TCP daytime service.
Loop indefinitely, accepting clients for (;;) // Get the next TCP client.
Close the connection catch (BindException be) System.err.println ("Service already running on port " catch (IOException ioe)
For a server, this is about as simple as it gets.
The first step in this server is to create a ServerSocket.
If this port is already bound, a BindException will be thrown, as no two servers can share the same port.
Otherwise, the server socket is created; the next step is to wait for connections.
Since daytime is a very simple protocol and our first example of a TCP server should be a simple one, we use here a single-threaded server.
A for loop that loops indefinitely is commonly used in simple TCP servers, or a while loop whose expression always evaluates to true.
This method returns a socket that represents the connection to the client.
For logging, the IP address and port of the connection is sent to System.out.
You'll see this every time someone logs in and gets the time of day.
Daytime is a response-only protocol, so we don't need to worry about reading any input.
We obtain an OutputStream and then wrap it in a PrintStream to make it easier to work with.
Date class, we send it over the TCP stream to the client.
Finally, we flush all data in the print stream and close the connection by.
On Windows or other operating systems, this will not be a problem.
To run the server on the local machine, the following command would be used:
As a medium for communication, networks are fraught with problems.
With so many machines connected to the global Internet, the prospect of encountering a host whose hostname cannot be resolved, one that is disconnected from the network, or one that locks up during a connection, is very likely in the lifetime of a software application.
It is important, therefore, to be aware of the conditions that might cause such problems to arise in an application and to deal with them gracefully.
Of course, not every application will require precise control, and in simple applications you'll probably want to handle everything with a generic handler.
For those more advanced applications, however, it is important to be aware of the socket-specific exceptions that can be thrown at runtime.
All socket-specific exceptions extend from SocketException, so by simply catching that exception, you catch all of the socket-specific ones and write a single generic handler.
In addition, SocketException extends from java.io.IOException if you want to provide a catchall for any I/O exception.
The java.net.SocketException represents a generic socket error, which can represent a range of specific error conditions.
For finer-grained control, applications should catch the subclasses discussed below.
The java.net.BindException represents an inability to bind a socket to a local port.
The most common reason for this will be that the local port is already in use.
The java.net.ConnectException occurs when a socket can't connect to a specific remote host and port.
There can be several reasons for this, such as that the remote server does not have a service bound to that port, or that it is so swamped by queued connections, it cannot accept any further ones.
The java.net.NoRouteToHostException is thrown when, due to a network error, it is impossible to find a route to the remote host.
The cause of this may be local (i.e., the network on which the software application is running), may be a temporary gateway or router problem, or may be the fault of the remote network to which the socket is trying to connect.
Another common cause of this is that firewalls and routers are blocking the client software, which is usually a permanent condition.
The java.net.InterruptedIOException occurs when a read operation is blocked for sufficient time to cause a network timeout, as discussed earlier in the chapter.
Handling timeouts is a good way to make your code more robust and reliable.
Communication over TCP with sockets is an important technique to master, as many of the most interesting application protocols in use today occur over TCP.
The Java socket API provides a clear and easy mechanism by which developers are able to accept communications as a server or initiate communications as a client.
By using the concepts discussed earlier involving input and output streams under Java, the transition to socket-based communication is straightforward.
With the level of exception handling built into the java.net package, it's also very easy to deal with network errors that occur at runtime.
Just as a team of developers collaborating together on a project can split the work into small chunks that can be completed concurrently, software applications employ a similar strategy called multi-threading to split tasks into manageable units.
Multi-threaded programming is an important concept in Java networking, as networking clients and servers must often perform several different tasks at a time (for example, listening for incoming requests and responses, processing data, and updating the text or graphical user interface for the user)
Before undertaking multi-threaded applications in Java, it is important for the developer to understand the differences between singlethreaded programming, multiprocess programming, and multi-threaded programming.
The concept of multi-threading can initially be difficult to grasp.
Many of the oldest programming languages and operating systems did not even support it.
Some readers will be new to multithreading, as they never had a reason to use it in their software development or computer science classes at college.
Traditional software written in procedural languages is compiled into a machine-readable format, which is called machine code.
This code is read by a central processing unit (CPU), which executes programming statements one after another, in a sequential manner (see Figure 7-1)
The time taken to execute each statement may vary (due to the nature of the operation, such as comparing two bytes for equality or adding two numbers together), but until a statement is completed, no further statements will run.
The chief advantage of this type of programming is its simplicity.
If a statement has not been completed, the next statement has not been executed.
This means that developers can easily predict the state of a machine at any given moment in time.
It is guaranteed that a variable being accessed in a single-threaded environment will not be accessed or modified by another copy of the program, as only one copy of the program is running.
Readers familiar with programming for the Unix platform may be acquainted with the concept of multiprocess programming.
Each application runs as a process, with memory allocated for program code and data storage.
Multiple processes would run on the same machine (allowing multiple users to connect to their accounts via telnet sessions, for example)
The operating system would allocate CPU time to each process, suspending a process when its time was up and allowing another to take its place.
Sometimes, a process will become blocked (waiting on I/O), or may voluntarily choose to yield its CPU time.
The operating system creates the illusion that these processes are running concurrently, by frequently switching from one process to another and sharing time between them (though not always equally)
This type of multitasking is extremely important, as it means that one machine can share its CPU time across many users.
Programs themselves could create new processes, having one part of the program performing a task while another part does something else (see Figure 7-2)
For example, when checking for e-mail messages on a remote machine, a user interface could display the progress of the operation and allow the user to compose messages or read previously downloaded messages from his or her inbox.
At the same time, another process could be acting as a network client, retrieving new messages.
This type of programming is useful, as it means that work can be performed even if one part of the program becomes stalled (for example, waiting for input)
Application processes can fork in two, having one or more subprocesses perform useful work.
Although multiprocess programming works well, there are disadvantages to its use.
First, when a process branches into two, there is overlap between the data storage of one process and another.
Because two copies of data are being kept, more memory than is needed is consumed.
Second, there isn't an easy way for one process to access and modify the data of another.
In Unix, InterProcess Communication (IPC) is used, creating data pipes that allow a process to communicate with another.
Nonetheless, it is not as easy to design software that shares data in a multiprocess environment as it is in a multi-threaded one.
Multi-threaded programming requires a different way of looking at software.
Rather than executing a series of steps sequentially, tasks are executed concurrently—that is, many tasks are performed at the same time, rather than one task having to finish before another can start.
Multithreading, also known as multiple threads of execution, allows a program to have multiple instances of itself running, while using the same shared memory space and code (unlike multiprocess programming, which uses separate memory address spaces, making communication between processes difficult)
An application can be performing many different tasks concurrently, and threads may access shared data variables to work collaboratively.
You've probably seen this type of behavior in software applications, although you might not have recognized it.
When programs with a graphical user interface are run, they typically use multithreading.
For example, a GUI application running on a Windows machine may be performing some processing task, such as updating cells in a spreadsheet or spooling a document to the printer.
Have you ever wondered why you can move a window around, resize it, or access the file menu, even though the application is performing some other task? The graphical user interface (which often uses GUI components of the underlying operating system) is being continually updated, independent of the actual application, by one or more GUI threads that update screen display and catch GUI events such as mouse clicks and drags.
While some applications don't take advantage of multi-threading and are written as single-threaded applications, they are still running in a multi-threaded environment.
The operating system can allow other applications and other threads to execute, while the single-threaded application is oblivious.
Unless you have more than one CPU, only a single thread can be running at any given moment in time.
The operating system maintains a queue of threads and allocates CPU time to them.
However, time must be shared—allocating all the time to a single thread would be unfair, as it would prevent other threads from doing their work (this is known as thread starvation)
A pre emptive multitasking operating system is one that will suspend a thread (even if it still has work to do) so that other threads can be given CPU time.
Of course, deciding which thread should be allocated CPU time is tricky.
The process of determining which thread to run is called scheduling.
Not all operating systems allocate thread time fairly, but to give the operating system a guide, threads are allocated a priority level.
Some threads operate at a very high level of priority, which means that they are given first shot at CPU time, while other threads operate at a very low level of priority.
Low-priority threads don't normally get a fair share of CPU time, and may not run at all if higher-priority threads exhaust all available CPU time.
Since the choice of which thread is executed is up to the operating system and not the application, it becomes impossible to predict the order of execution, or how much CPU time will be given.
If the order of thread execution cannot be predicted, it is impossible to know which tasks will be completed first or have even been started.
Tasks may be preempted before they are completed, which can cause problems if another thread accesses the same memory variable at the same time.
Imagine a scenario in which data records are being accessed and modified by multiple threads.
Suppose one thread is generating a total of the number of items stored in a warehouse, and is suspended partway through the total to allow another thread to run.
This second thread modifies the contents of a record to indicate that an item has been removed.
The first thread is resumed, and continues on in its calculations completely unaware that items have been removed and that the records have been modified.
At the end of its task, its calculation is inaccurate because it was unable to account for the fact that the record contents had changed.
If threads are accessing and modifying data haphazardly, how then can useful work be performed? Careful attention must be paid to concurrent access and modification of data, to prevent data from becoming out of sync.
With careful design, however, data can be locked, which will prevent read access while write access occurs.
Multi-threaded programming can be difficult to master, but the rewards that it offers are great.
Networking clients do not need to lock up the GUI if a network connection stalls, and servers can process multiple clients concurrently.
Addition ally, threads may use variables independently, and are not forced to share the same data.
A thread could, for example, declare its own set of variables that it does not make available to other threads (by marking them as private or protected), thus ensuring that an access conflict does not occur.
Java, like many modern programming languages, includes support for multi-threaded applications.
In Java, threads of execution are represented by the java.
It is very important that developers be aware of both.
The java.lang.Thread class provides methods to start, suspend, resume, and stop a thread, as well as to control other aspects such as the priority of a thread or the name associated with it.
Keep in mind that threads do not start running automatically at creation time.
The following example shows how to extend the Thread class and start several instances running, each in a separate thread.
When compiled and run, this example shows the threads being created and the output of each.
The threads sleep for five seconds, to simulate the occurrence of meaningful work, and then terminate, which has the result of closing the thread.
Only once all threads are terminated will the main method exit.
Second, the main method terminates once the two threads are started.
There is no pause or sleep command issued in the main thread—yet the application doesn't terminate.
It keeps on going (though it has no actual work to do and is idle) until the two threads have finished their work and expected that it will complete its work and not shut down prematurely.
The Java Virtual Machine (JVM) will not terminate until all user threads have finished, or until a call is made to the only useful when other threads are running (such as the actual application, which will eventually terminate when the user is finished with it)
We call these types of threads daemon threads, as opposed to user threads.
If only daemon threads are running, the JVM will automatically terminate.
If you need to change the state of a thread to either a daemon or a user thread, this must be done before the thread is started—its state cannot be changed once the thread is running.
The second change introduces a slight pause, to allow the daemon threads time to display their first message.
When you recompile and run this example, you'll notice that the threads do not complete their work and display their final message.
This is because there are no more user threads active once the main method finishes.
The primary thread is always a user thread, never a daemon thread.)
While extending the Thread class is one way to create a multi-threaded application, it isn't always the best way.
Remember, Java supports only single inheritance, unlike languages such as C++, which supports multiple inheritance.
This means that if a class extends the java.lang.Thread class, it cannot extend any other class—a feature that is often necessary in the design of Java software.
A better way is often to implement the java.lang.Runnable interface.
The precise signature for the run method is as follows:
The Runnable interface doesn't define any other methods, or provide any thread-specific functionality.
Its sole purpose is to identify classes capable of running as threads.
When an object implementing the Runnable interface is passed to the constructor of a thread, and the thread's.
There are several advantages to using the Runnable interface over extending the Thread class.
The first, as mentioned above, is that an object is free to inherit from a different class.
Second, the same Runnable object can be passed to more than one thread, so several concurrent threads can be using the same code and acting on the same data.
Though this use is not always advised, it can make sense in certain circumstances, providing that due care is taken to prevent conflicts over data access.
Third, carefully designed applications can minimize overhead, as creating a new Thread instance requires valuable memory and CPU time.
A Runnable instance, on the other hand, doesn't incur the same burden of a thread, and can still be passed to a thread at a later point in time to be reused and run again if necessary.
Below is an example of a multi-threaded application that uses the Runnable interface rather than a subclass of the Thread class.
Create runnable object // Create a thread, and pass the runnable object.
When the example is compiled and run, two threads can be seen printing a message to the console.
What is very different about this program, and the previous one, is that only one Runnable object was created, but two different threads ran it.
Although there was no shared data in this example, in more complex systems, threads must share access to resources, to prevent modification while a resource is being accessed.
This is achieved by synchronizing access to resources (discussed later in the chapter)
As shown in the previous two examples, it is relatively easy to start a thread executing.
Observant readers may have noticed that whenever a call to the Thread.
This is because the sleep method puts a thread to sleep for a long period of time, during which it is generally unable to rouse itself.
However, if a thread must be awakened earlier, interrupting a thread will awaken it; maintain a reference to the sleeping thread.
The following example demonstrates the interruption of a thread, by using the.
Run method is executed when thread first started System.out.println ("I feel sleepy.
Main method to create and start threads java.io.IOException // Create a 'sleepy' thread.
The sole purpose of the thread in this example is to go to sleep for a very long time.
The only course of action is to send an interrupt message from another thread.
Run the example, and you'll see that the thread is idle.
The primary thread (executing the main method) waits for the user to hit "enter," then sends an interrupt message (which will be caught unless the sleeping thread has awoken of its own accord and terminated)
The secondary thread awakens, displays a message, and then terminates, allowing the application to close.
Sometimes it is necessary to terminate a thread before its task has been completed.
For example, if a network client is sending messages to a mail server in a second thread, and the user wants to cancel the operation (perhaps to delete a hastily constructed flame before it is sent), the thread should be stopped immediately.
One thread can send a stop message to another thread, by message) to maintain a reference to the thread that it wants to shut down.
Main method to create and start threads java.io.IOException // Create and start counting thread.
Prompt user and wait for input System.out.println ("Press any enter to stop the thread.
Once started, the thread in this example will display an incrementing count, which will go on Sometimes it is absolutely necessary to stop a thread, but this method must be used with caution.
It is deprecated in the Java 2 platform, because of a potential problem that can cause data corruption.
When a thread is stopped in this way, access monitors that protect two threads from accessing the same resource concurrently are released, but the resource itself might be in an inconsistent state.
Although this would rarely happen, it can occur without warning.
For this reason, it is advised that threads regularly check whether or not they should continue (for example, method.
An excellent example of this is shown in the Java API documentation for the creating a thread that polls to see if it should continue, rather than allowing itself to be "stopped."
This can occur if a suspended thread has locked a monitor and cannot release it while suspended.
While the methods will still work, it is advised that they are not used.
Sometimes a thread might be waiting for an event to occur, or may be entering a section of code where releasing CPU time to another thread will improve either system performance or the user experience (for example, after performing a calculation that should be displayed to the user and before starting another one)
It is sometimes advantageous, in these situations, for a thread to yield CPU time to another thread rather than sleeping for a long period of time.
For example, while waiting for data to become available from an InputStream, a thread might yield CPU time method could be invoked:
As this statement takes only a single line of code, and does not require interaction with another thread, no example is provided.
Nonetheless, it is a useful method to be aware of, particularly in complex systems where many threads are fighting for CPU time.
Remember, too, that it is a static method that affects the currently running thread only—an application cannot yield the time of a specific thread.
Sometimes it is necessary to wait until a thread has finished its task (for example, to retrieve the results of the task by invoking a method, or reading a member variable)
To determine if a thread boolean value, can be invoked.
But continually checking the value returned by this method (known as polling), and then sleeping or yielding, is a very inefficient use of CPU time.
A much an overloaded version of this method, which takes as a parameter a long value.
This version waits for a thread death or the specified number of milliseconds, whichever comes first.
Main method to create and start threads java.lang.InterruptedException // Create and start dying thread.
When run, the example, shows that the primary application thread launches a secondary thread.
An important consideration when designing multi-threaded applications is conflict over access to data.
If two threads are fighting for the same resource, and a mechanism to resolve access conflicts is not put into place, the integrity of the application is at stake.
Built into the Java language are two mechanisms for preventing concurrent access to resources: method-level synchronization and block-level synchronization.
Method-level synchronization prevents two threads from executing methods on an object at the same time.
When a synchronized method of an object is invoked, a thread takes out an object lock, or monitor.
If another thread attempts to execute any synchronized method, it finds that it is locked, and enters a state of suspension until the lock on the object monitor is released.
If several threads attempt to execute a method on a locked object, a queue of suspended threads will form.
When the thread that instituted the lock returns from the method, only one of the queued threads may access the object—the release of a monitor does not allow more than one object to take out a new monitor.
One should note, however, that if a method is not synchronized and is executed while the object is locked, the thread will not block and the method can be run.
Method-level synchronization is a common mechanism for synchronizing access to resources.
When designing multi-threaded applications, or classes that need to be thread-safe for use in multi-threaded environments, methods can be synchronized to prevent data loss or corruption.
Unless data can be accessed atomically (in one operation, without the possibility of a thread being suspended by the JVM and control given to another), synchronization is needed.
Consider the simple example of a counter (such as of how many times an action like a hit on a Web page has occurred) stored in a file.
This counter may be incremented (by reading the current value and writing a new one) or read by multiple threads.
If one thread tries to increment the value of the.
This means that the counter would read an invalid value.
Worse still, if two attempts to overwrite the value were made, the file might be corrupted.
If the methods to access and modify the value of the counter were synchronized, however, only one thread could perform a write operation at any given moment.
The synchronized keyword is used to indicate that a method should be protected by a monitor.
Every method that could possibly be affected by concurrent access should be marked as synchronized.
This keyword should be used sparingly, however, as it has a performance drawback.
While fine for multi-threaded applications, in a single-threaded context it results in a waste of CPU time.
Let's look at a practical example of thread conflicts, and how they may be solved using synchronized methods.
Suppose we have a counter that can both be incremented and display a value.
If the method that provides access to the counter isn't thread-safe, and takes some time to complete, then two or more threads could access it at the same time and overwrite each increment.
Before the value of the counter can be stored, a second thread could write a new one, which is in turn overwritten (see Figure 7-3)
This gets even more confusing when a read is made.
Since one update has been lost, an inaccurate tally is obtained.
If frequent changes are made to the counter, it becomes more and more inaccurate.
Concurrent access and modification of data by threads leads to data corruption.
The solution is to make the counter thread-safe, by synchronizing each method that performs a read or write operation.
If a synchronized method is used, only one thread can update the value at any given moment (see Figure 7-4)
The thread that first invokes a synchronized method locks the object's monitor, which is released only when that method terminates.
No other thread can access any synchronized method of the counter object (though if multiple counters are used, this.
For this reason, synchronized methods should be as brief as possible—threads that go to sleep inside a synchronized method will cause all other threads trying to invoke synchronized methods on that object to be suspended.
The following class defines a counter with synchronized access and modification methods.
Simulate slow data processing and modification // Removing the synchronized keyword will demonstrate // how inaccurate concurrent access can be.
Adjusting // this value may be necessary on faster machines.
The next class is an application that uses multiple threads with a single counter.
Due to the synchronized keyword, concurrent modification of the counter's value is impossible—but compiling and running the example without the presence of the synchronized keyword reveals some interesting results.
However, as the write operation is so quick, it needs to be slowed down on faster machines to allow other threads time to machines.
Increase the counter the specified number of times // Increase the counter.
Our runnable instance will increase the counter // ten times, for each thread that runs it.
Three threads are launched, which increment the counter 10 times each.
This means that, when the synchronized keyword is present, a total value of 30 will be returned by the counter's and the resulting count is significantly less.
Method-level synchronization is an effective means of preventing concurrent access to resources.
But what if the resource has not been designed as thread-safe, and is a preexisting class that the developer cannot modify (such as a class in the Java API, or a third-party library)? Block-level synchronization, in this case, is the best option.
Block-level synchronization uses the synchronized keyword, but instead of placing a lock around particular methods, a lock is placed around blocks of code.
A block of code is synchronized against a particular object, and any thread attempting to enter that block of code is locked out, until the monitor for the specified object is released.
The following code snippet shows the syntax for a synchronized block:
This means that multiple blocks can protect access to the same object, so block-level synchronization can be applied in thread code wherever an object is accessed or modified.
It is a variation on the previous example, but instead of creating a separate class to represent a counter, an instance variable is used.
The access and modification of the variable Instead, block-level synchronization protects the count, and ensures that when the count is written to a String Buffer (which is a string that can be appended), it is written in the correct order.
While threads can, of course, act in isolation (in fact, a design that requires no communication between threads lends itself to a far simpler implementation), sometimes it is necessary for threads to communicate with each other.
Often, the type of communication will be fairly simple, such as reading or modifying a public member variable, or invoking an object method.
Two good options for communication are waiting thread of an event.
Like multiprocess communication, which uses pipes to send data from one process to another, threads can also send data directly from one thread to another.
This is achieved by using special types of input and output streams, which are linked together.
By passing either end of the pipe to another thread, that thread may listen to, or speak to, another thread.
Piped communication is only one way, but two pipes may be used.
Communicating via pipes is not very different from using any other form of input stream or output stream.
Other streams may also be connected to a pipe, for easier reading and writing.
The following example demonstrates the use of pipes in thread communication.
Create an instance of the PipeDemo class // Copy to local member variable.
Create a pipe for reading, and connect it to // output pipe.
Create a new pipe demo thread, to write to // our pipe.
Close the stream catch (Exception e) // no code req'd.
Running this example will create a one-way pipe between the primary application thread and a second thread that sends a text message through the pipe.
The pipe must be constructed before the thread is started, however, and it must be passed somehow to the thread, so that it has a reference to a pipe object.
In this case, the pipe is passed to the thread's constructor—a convenient way of initializing the thread and getting the pipe there.
A common requirement in multi-threaded programming is that one thread cannot proceed until the completion of a task by another thread.
Sometimes a thread will be producing information or using resources.
Other times, the order of execution is important, and a task cannot take place before another has completed.
While it is possible for one thread to wait until another has died (thus performs an ongoing task and never terminates?
The solution is to notify other threads that a task has been completed.
Threads wait until they are notified, and notification can be a repeated process (with several cycles of waiting and notifying)
This allows threads to synchronize their actions and communicate that a critical event has occurred, with-out requiring the extra complexity of pipe-based communication or invoking methods.
Sometimes a thread may not even know exactly which threads are waiting for it to complete, so a special type of notification is used.
Every Java object inherits from the java.lang.Object class (the superclass of every object) the ability to maintain a queue of threads waiting for an object lock to be released, and to notify one or more waiting threads that the object is freed.
This provides a great way to notify a thread that an event has occurred, and for threads to wait indefinitely (or for a limited amount of time) until notification is sent.
To gain a lock on an object's monitor, it must be executing a.
When the lock is released, another thread can obtain it—without this, the thread will wait indefinitely.
There is no choice over which thread is awakened, either (this is determined by the JVM implementation, so you cannot rely on, notify a specific thread.
The following example demonstrates the use of the wait/notify methods.
Wait for the notification thread to trigger event synchronized (notificationThread)
The primary application thread waits until notified by the second thread that an event has occurred.
Until the user hits the "enter" key, the second thread will not send the notification message.
Though the application terminates once notification is sent and frequently occurring, events.
While threads can be created and run individually, sometimes it is easier to work with threads as a group, rather than one at a time.
Operations that affect threads, such as suspending and resuming threads, stopping them cold, or interrupting them, can be performed on individual threads, but this requires developers to maintain a list of threads (using a data structure such as a vector or an array)
When an operation must be performed, each and every thread in this list must be traversed and then acted upon.
This creates extra work for developers by requiring more complex code.
An easier alternative is to group threads together and apply an operation on the group rather than on the individual elements of the group.
The Java API provides support for groups of threads in the form of the ThreadGroup class.
The purpose of the ThreadGroup class is to represent a collection of threads, and to provide methods that act as shortcuts to invoking methods on individual threads in the collection.
It also provides a way of gathering information about commonly related threads, such as the number of threads in a group, and references to the threads stored in a group.
If access to individual threads is needed, it can be obtained from the ThreadGroup, rather than having to create some other data structure to act as a container.
When a JVM is first started and a Java application is run, the primary application thread will run threads not associated with a specific group.
A group may be composed of as many threads as needed, and may be dynamically added to at any point during a program's execution (see Figure 76)
However, there is no way to unhook a thread (or a thread group) from a group.
Note, also, that under controlled environments such as customized security managers, applets running within a browser, or code executing within a servlet engine, restrictions may be placed on creating new thread groups, or on accessing existing ones.
Furthermore, a group of threads may contain additional thread groups, which are counted as subgroups (Figure 7-7)
Operations such as stopping or suspending may be performed on the subgroups or the parent group.
When an operation is applied to the parent group, it will cause the operation to be propagated to every subgroup, which in turn will pass the operation on to every thread within that subgroup.
This means that a single operation can be invoked on several, dozens, or even hundreds of threads.
This makes for a much cleaner design—there is no need for endless amounts of loops iterating through a list of threads.
The inclusion of subgroups allows for finergrained control over thread operations, as selected groups can be acted upon while others are left untouched.
Thread groups may contain threads and subgroups, which in turn may include more groups and threads.
The parent group of the ThreadGroup will be the parent of the currently running thread.
This constructor allows a group to be stored as a subgroup, rather than being created as a separate group.
For example, to create a group and subgroup, the following code could be used:
Once created, a thread group can be used in much the same way as a normal thread—it can be suspended, resumed, interrupted, and stopped by calling the appropriate method.
However, a further step must be performed before the thread can be used effectively—it must contain threads.
After all, an empty thread group isn't of much use.
Threads are associated with a particular group at the time of their creation.
Thus, it is not possible to assign a thread to a group at a later date, or move a thread from one group to another.
When a thread is created and no group is assigned to the constructor, the thread group of the currently running thread will be assigned.
Specifying a group gives developers a choice of which group a thread will be located in.
Once threads are associated with the group, group operations can be performed, the number of threads/groups that are active can be checked, and a list of threads can be obtained, simply by invoking the appropriate ThreadGroup method.
The following methods of the ThreadGroup class are public unless otherwise noted.
The behavior of this method is not well defined, and it has been deprecated in the Java 2 platform.
If this is not the case, an IllegalThreadStateException will be method is called.
If, however, the size of the array is not large enough to accommodate the number of active threads, no ArrayOutOfBoundsException will be thrown—the method will instead leave out the extra threads, and the application may remain unaware of this.
For this reason, a sufficiently large array should be used.
The number of threads copied into the array is returned by this method, not the number of threads that should have been copied.
To determine the number of active threads (for the purpose of creating an array), a call may, however, be added to the group, so this call should be made just prior to invoking the enumerate method.
If the subgroup boolean flag is set to "true," threads from subgroups will also be included.
A sufficiently large array should be used (to determine the length of this array, see the enumerate(Thread[] threadList) method threads in this group, and any subgroup, the size of the array may be too large.
For this reason, applications should check the return value of this method, which indicates the number of threads stored in the array.
SecurityException— places a reference to all active groups, and any subgroups, into the specified array.
As warned in the enumerate (Thread[] threadList) method description, the array must be allocated to a sufficiently large size to accommodate the number of active thread groups.
The number of groups copied to the array will be returned by this method.
If the subgroup boolean flag is set to "true," subgroups will also be included, and if set to "false," only groups in the current group will be included (i.e., one level deep)
As with all other ThreadGroup.enumerate(...) methods, a sufficiently large enough array must be created, or extra thread groups will be excluded.
The return value from this method indicates the number of groups stored in the array.
Threads may not exceed their group's priority level, though an error will not be thrown if an attempt to do so is made.
All threads are part of some group, though accessing the parent group could cause an exception to be thrown.
A daemon group may be destroyed when all active threads are terminated.
A value of "true" makes the thread group a daemon group, which means that it can be destroyed when all active threads are terminated.
This method does not reset the priority of existing threads (i.e., a higher-priority thread that is part of the group will not be reduced in priority, but may not increase its priority further)
Applications that want to trap these types of errors (for example, for logging purposes) must extend the ThreadGroup class and override this method.
Create a group that is a child of another thread group.
As mentioned at the beginning of the chapter, multi-threading is achieved by rapidly switching between one thread and another to simulate concurrent execution of code.
Unless there are multiple CPUs, the operating system will switch between one thread and another based on an arbitrary algorithm over which individual threads have no control.
Thus, it is impossible to predict the order in which threads will be executed, or when (if at all) a thread will be scheduled.
The best that can be done is to suggest the relative priority of threads, which gives the operating system an indication of which threads are more important (and should be scheduled more frequently, or for a longer duration)
Some thread priorities are defined as static member variables of the java.lang.Thread class, a convenient shortcut that eliminates the need for remembering a numerical value.
Table 7.1 shows the numerical thread priorities and associated shortcuts.
To set the thread priority, the Thread.setPriorityMethod (int) method is used.
For example, to set a thread to the minimum priority level, the following code would be used:
A thread that wishes to determine its current thread priority (for example, to see if it is high enough, and take corrective action if it is not), may do so by invoking the.
For example, to get the priority of the currently running thread, the following code could be used:
Sometimes it may be necessary to limit the maximum priority that a thread could request (for example, if executing untrusted code downloaded from over the network)
It is possible to install a custom security manager, which would throw a SecurityException, but this involves a significant amount of effort.
A much easier alternative is to create a ThreadGroup (covered in the previous section), and assign a maximum priority level to this group.
Any thread that requests a higher priority will not receive it, but nor will an error message be generated.
To assign a maximum thread priority for a group, the ThreadGroup.
For example, to set a thread priority of 8, the following code would be used:
An understanding of multi-threaded programming is important for any type of application or applet programming, but particularly so for software development for networking environments.
Networks are slow and unreliable, so networking code will often need to be running in a separate thread from that of the user interface, to prevent a system from locking up or stalling due to changes in network state.
Furthermore, most networking software interacts with multiple clients and/or servers, and unless the operations are extremely quick (such as receiving and dispatching a UDP packet), multiple threads will be needed so that interactions can occur concurrently.
How to create multi-threaded applications by extending the java.lang.Thread class.
How to create multi-threaded applications by implementing the java.lang.Runnable interface.
How to interrupt, stop, and wait for the death of threads • How to guard against concurrent access to resources, using method-level and.
Synchronization of access to data, communication between threads, and thread scheduling are difficult components for the programmer to master, and thus even experienced developers encounter problems when they rely too heavily on predicting the order of thread execution.
In many situations, it is important that synchronization of access to resources is used to preserve data integrity and the order of operations.
Additionally, communication between threads may be employed to aid threads in collaborating to complete tasks.
Implementing Application Protocols This chapter presents an overview of common Internet application protocols, and provides code examples of three protocol implementations under Java.
Here we use the techniques covered in Chapter 6 to create client and server software using sockets supporting popular Internet protocols.
An application protocol facilitates communication between applications, using the services of lower-level Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model layers (for example, network and physical layers)
When you check your e-mail, browse a Web site, play games, or download files over the Internet, the software you run is using an application protocol for communication.
For applications to interoperate, the implementation of application protocols must be precise.
You can't have one application speaking one way and another application unable to understand or interpret the message—otherwise the many thousands of software applications running on the many millions of computers in existence couldn't get along.
This is not to say that every implementation will support every feature of a protocol, or that they will be implemented in the same way, in the same language, or on the same machine.
However, protocol implementations must, at least outwardly, behave in the same way, and when they can't fulfill a request or support a feature, they must communicate that effectively, using a commonly understood process.
The semantics of a protocol are laid out in a protocol specification document.
This allows developers to implement the same protocol on a variety of platforms and languages and have them communicate successfully.
Early on in the history of the Internet, a system was designed that made it easy to distribute new and updated protocol specifications to protocol implementers.
The design of a network protocol tends to be an evolutionary process involving many contributors, with initial drafts being made available to the public and rewrites undertaken.
When the protocol nears completion and is ready for applications to implement it, it is published as a Request For Comment (RFC) document.
Most of the popular Internet protocols in use today are published as RFCs.
These documents are extremely detailed and contain all the information required for implementing the protocol.
Not every RFC covers a protocol, however—some are general overviews, notes on Internet architecture, or suggestions for revisions to existing protocols.
Though RFCs are mirrored across many hosts on the Internet, the original and most up-to-date source is the RFC Editor, operated by the Internet Society.
The RFC Editor Web site allows users to search for RFCs by number or by using keywords, authors, or titles.
If, on the other hand, you knew the name of the protocol but not its number, you'd search by title or keyword.
For example, to search for the FTP you could enter the title "File Transfer Protocol." This query returns several RFCs, as some earlier specifications cover modifications to the protocol, or earlier versions of it.
The higher the number, the more recent the RFC publication is.
By running this query, you can quickly locate RFC 765, which contains the information needed to write compatible FTP clients or servers.
Alternatively, you can access RFCs by using an FTP client and connecting to the site ftp.rfceditor.org.
By using a Web search engine, you can also find mirrors of RFC archives, some of which have converted the specifications to HTML format for easy reading.
The most enjoyable part of learning network programming is putting the network theory that you've learned into practice, by writing real-life applications that interact with other Internet services or clients.
Earlier in this book we covered the theory; now it's time to write some code.
The Simple Mail Transfer Protocol is used to send messages of various types between users over a TCP/IP network.
It should be noted that this protocol assumes that some other method is used to actually read the messages, thus allowing a more stable, flexible, and robust global e-mail system.
By separating delivering messages from reading, things are made much simpler.
Together, we'll write a basic SMTP client that allows the user to send a text message to a specific e-mail address.
If you require something more elaborate, such as multiple senders or attachments, you could modify the code yourself as a programming exercise, or use the JavaMail API covered in Chapter 13; it provides prewritten support for advanced mail features.
The client written here offers a good example of networking, while minimizing such supporting code as that for a user interface.
For this reason, simple text-based input is used, and the commands sent to the server are displayed to help the reader understand how the protocol works.
Constructs a new instance of the SMTP Client try catch (Exception e)
Write a protocol message both to the network socket and to // the screen protected void writeMsg(String msg) throws Exception.
Send an email message via SMTP, adhering to the protocol // known as RFC 2821
Obtain input from the user // Read input from user console.
Check for a '.', and only a '.', on a line if(line.equalsIgnoreCase(".")) break;
As can be seen here, the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol is quite straightforward, consisting of a single connection to a mail server using a TCP socket, followed by a series of short protocol commands that specify the details of the e-mail to be sent, as described in RFC 2821
While many network applications will require multiple threads of execution, as a general rule simple clients such as this one do not.
This example merely asks for input from the user and then sends the message.
To simplify understanding of this code, the networking code has been separated from the nonnetworking code (which consists mainly of code for obtaining input from the user)
Send an email message via SMTP, adhering to the protocol // known as RFC 2821
Write a protocol message both to the network socket and to // the screen protected void writeMsg(String msg) throws Exception;
We'll cover the e-mail-specific code, as the remainder of the application is fairly straightforward Java coding.
Our class stores the message and network details inside protected variables (rather than private ones, so readers can create subclasses that access these variables if required)
The hostname, port, from, to, subject, and body variables are fairly self-explanatory—they are required for locating the mail server to send an SMTP message, and for the e-mail addressing and content details.
The socket is used to communicate with the remote TCP server that will relay our mail for us, and the reader/writer objects are used for reading and sending SMTP messages.
While it's certainly possible to group this process into one single method, for convenience and readability, some of the workload has been distributed across several helper methods that decode SMTP responses, send protocol messages, and terminate connections.
The SMTP normally uses port 25, but if your network/ISP uses a nonstandard port number for this service, you could modify the default value of this to the required port number.
If an error occurs, an exception is thrown and caught by our error handler; otherwise a successful connection to the server is established.
Once connected, we obtain input streams and output streams for the socket, and connect these to readers and writers for convenience.
According to the SMTP specification, upon connecting, the server will send a response code in greeting, so the application checks for a valid message with the SMTP service, and not some other service using port 25
The code for determining the response code is wrapped inside a helper method, called It reads a line of text from the buffered reader that communicates with the SMTP server, outputs the result to the screen for illustrative purposes, and then strips off everything after the first space.
Finally, it converts the result to an integer and passes it back, giving us the SMTP response code.
When we need to send a message back to the SMTP server, we use the helper method writeMsg(String) which displays the message to the screen for illustrative purposes and then sends it (via our PrintWriter) to the server.
Write a protocol message both to the network socket and to // the screen protected void writeMsg(String msg) throws Exception.
The next step in SMTP is to send an identification message, telling the SMTP server who we really are.
We send the hostname identification command, "HELO." The format is "HELO" followed by a space and the local hostname.
If the server accepts the identification, the client is free to send a message.
Each message has certain key aspects—a "From" address, one or more "To" addresses, a subject line, and a message body (the actual text of the message)
The SMTP only requires fields that deal directly with delivery of messages, though other fields can be placed in the message body.
For example, it is commonly accepted to put the subject line as the first line, with "Subject:" in front of it.
You can include as many other optional fields as you like, but remember that not every mail client will support these fields.
Furthermore, you should also repeat the "To" and "From" fields in your message body.
Setting the sender and recipient addressing information under SMTP is fairly straightforward.
Two commands are used, the "MAIL FROM:" and "RCPT TO:"
In this example, only one recipient is supported, but SMTP can handle multiple recipients.
You should note that well-configured servers normally place a limit on the number of possible recipients, to prevent them from being used in spamming campaigns, and that some SMTP servers will reject messages if the sender is not part of their local or dial-up network.
Once the e-mail addresses are set, we can send the data to the server.
Our client sends a simple text message, unencumbered by attachments.
The first step to send the data is to signal that we are ready to send a message body, by issuing a "DATA" command.
This must include relevant header fields, such as "To," "From," "Subject," and any other fields you may choose to add.
Once the headers are complete, a blank line is sent, indicating that the message text will follow.
After outputting the text, the client sends the message, which is then terminated by a period, then a carriage return/line-feed (which the user enters during data input)
Finally, the "QUIT" command is sent, and the connection is terminated by invoking the its way.
The previous example showed how to write a protocol implementation of SMTP to send a mail message.
It is also referred to simply as POP, since the earlier Post Office Protocols are not used any more.
When a person reads their e-mail, they are actually retrieving it from a mail server belonging to an Internet service provider or a local network (such as a corporate or private intranet)
There are several major types of mail servers, and each type uses a different network protocol to access email.
The most common of these is POP, a protocol that provides a contrast with SMTP.
In examining the POP3 client, you'll find that the actual code required for a network implementation is minimal.
Much of the actual application involves user input or output.
The interface is limited to text I/O; the idea behind this client is to provide a good example of networking while minimizing the need for non-networking code that readers may already be familiar with, such as GUI design.
The example will retrieve messages from a mailbox and display their contents, one after another, to the text console screen.
Constructs a new instance of the POP3 client try // Get user input.
Returns TRUE if POP response indicates success, FALSE if // failure.
Reads a line from the POP server, and displays it to // screen protected String readLine(boolean debug) throws Exception // Append a < character to indicate this is a server protocol response if (debug) else return line;
Writes a line to the POP server, and displays it to the screen protected void writeMsg(String msg) throws Exception.
In fact, the chief difference is a call to the displayEmails method instead of to the sendEmail method.
In addition, there are several helper methods that assist in conducting communication via POP3
Like the SMTP application, several important variables are requested from the user.
To retrieve email messages, you need to know the hostname of the mail server, the username of the account, application, which uses simple text I/O to request details from the user.
We also store the port number of the server (which is fixed to the default port of 110)
If, for example, you needed to support nonstandard POP servers, you could modify this value.
The most important part of the application is the Post Office Protocol implementation.
This is where we get to write real networking code.
To make things clearer and more efficient, some of the protocol code is split into helper methods, which perform tasks such as processing a POP response to see that no error code was issued, and reading/writing protocol commands.
We start by creating a network socket to the POP server, using the Socket class.
The next step is to obtain readers and writers connected to the socket stream, so that we can communicate with the server.
Upon establishing a connection, the server sends a POP response indicating that the server is ready for commands.
If the client does not receive a valid POP response, either the server is malfunctioning or a non-POP server is operating on that port.
For this reason, the client must helper method to determine this, which returns a boolean value.
The first command that is sent is "USER," which identifies the user account that the client is trying to access.
We send the command, along with the username, by using the helper method writeMsg(String)
This also outputs the command to the text console, so you can see how the protocol is working.
We do the same then with the "PASS" command, which is used to authenticate the identity of the user.
At this point, the application will be ready to send commands, unless user authentication failed, in which case the application will have terminated.
Now we can request the number of mail messages available from the server.
This is achieved by sending the "STAT" command, which returns the number of messages.
We parse the response, looking for the message count, and then convert it to an int value.
Armed with this information, we can determine if the mailbox is empty or if there are messages to be retrieved.
If so, the application simply loops and displays the message contents.
During each loop, the user is presented with the option of quitting in case the message count is too high.
As you can see, reading e-mail is a fairly simple task, perhaps even easier than sending it.
You will be prompted for the hostname of your mail server (which, if you're not sure of, can be obtained by looking at your e-mail client's settings), the username, and then the password.
The HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) originated as a means of sharing documents across the Internet.
Since many documents are interrelated, the need to provide a link from one to the other was identified, but given the fact that many researchers from around the world were working independently, a single centralized document server was not the ideal method.
By placing a hyperlink over a word (such as a scientific term) or a phrase, users would be able to jump instantly from one document to another, even though the documents could reside on servers located in other countries.
Not only that, but hyperlinks could be made within the same document, such as to a glossary of terms.
Published as RFC 1945, HTTP became one of the most quickly adopted protocols, and led to what we now know as the World Wide Web.
Pioneered by Tim Berners-Lee and his colleagues at the CERN scientific laboratories as a way to share scientific information, it quickly spread to other parts of the academic world, and then to commercial and consumer markets.
The first, and most widely supported version, of HTTP is known as HTTP/1.0
This protocol supports a simple set of commands for retrieving resources from a Web server, such as HTML pages, images, documents, and other file types, as well as commands for posting information to the Web server so as to allow for the interactivity and customization of Web pages.
This capability is particularly important for Web sites that support advanced features, such as user customization or shopping carts.
The latest version of the protocol is known as HTTP/1.1
It offers many improvements over the previous version, with a wider set of commands to support new features of use both to browser developers and to those who write server-side Web applications.
However, older browsers and servers will not support all of these features, and indeed some are not yet in common use at all.
This next example demonstrates how to write a multi-threaded HTTP server that responds to requests from a Web browser, fetches files or Web pages, and sends them back to the user.
For the purposes of this example, we will use version 1.0 of the HTTP protocol and support only the GET method, which is used for file retrieval.
Other methods, such as POST, are useful when designing interactive server-side applications.
However, for such uses it is advised that the reader consider using a fully-fledged commercial server, and Java servlets (discussed in later chapters)
Handler for a HTTP request class Handler extends Thread protected Socket socket; protected PrintWriter pw; protected BufferedOutputStream bos; protected BufferedReader br; protected File docroot;
Check to see if request doesn't start with our // document root ....
The typical Web server must respond to requests from a number of browsers, and will usually handle more than one request for each browser (for example, the parallel downloading of a number of images in an HTML document)
This means that such servers need to handle requests for files concurrently, and the simplest method of doing this is to use multiple threads of execution.
Those readers who have not yet covered the topic of threads in Java are advised to consult the previous chapter, which examines multi-threading in detail.
This example Web server is designed to be extremely compact and rather plain.
It supports the bare minimum of features needed to function as a Web server, namely the HTTP/1.0 GET request.
No support for dynamic server-side content, such as CGI scripts or Java servlets, is offered—this is a bare-bones Web server example that illustrates how to write a basic server implementation of an RFC, and is intended primarily as a teaching aid.
However, it could be used as the scaffolding for a more ambitious project.
For ease of implementation, the server combines all of its code into a single Java source file.
This involves the use of an inner class (Handler) that deals with the processing of each incoming HTTP request.
Most of this server's work is done inside this handler.
The reason for this is to give high performance and to handle blocking I/O correctly so that if one client stalls, no others will be affected (since each request handler operates independently)
Within the WebServerDemo class are stored several variables that are crucial to the server's operation.
The docroot variable points to a location on a hard drive or network drive where the HTML pages and associated files (such as images) are stored for the Web server to read.
The port number is used to track which port the server is operating on.
Remember that while port 80 is standard for HTTP, it is common to run on nonstandard ports as well, particularly when an existing server is already running.
Finally, the ServerSocket represents a socket that is bound to a specific port and is listening for incoming client requests.
It is from this that we will accept browser requests.
When executed, the main(String[]) method of the server creates a new server instance.
Inside the constructor, the server checks for the presence of the necessary command-line parameters (a filepath for the HTML pages and a port number)
This code is handled by the parseParams(String[]) method, which involves only simple error-checking and string processing.
As for the networking code, an attempt is made to bind a server socket to that port, and then the server loops indefinitely while it waits for socket connections.
Start a new handler instance to process the // request.
As you can see, the code for accepting a connection and launching a new handler thread to process it is fairly simple.
One thing that is readily apparent is that writing a server for one particular protocol is not very different from writing one for another (though, as with everything else in life, there are always exceptions to the rule)
The main HTTP-specific work lies in the actual Handler class.
The handler's constructor is very simple—just enough to store the incoming parameters.
We also convert the Web server directory to an absolute location.
Since some operating systems allow directory/drive mappings, it is important to know the actual location, as later we must check for browser attempts to access other, forbidden locations.)
As is usual with any networking code, we must wrap it in an exception handler to deal with network errors at runtime.
Fortunately, we don't need to do anything about the errors—simply terminating the connection is sufficient.
The first step in writing our protocol handler will be to obtain I/O streams and wrap them in a reader/writer.
The next step is to read a line of text sent by the browser, which (it is hoped) will contain a valid HTTP command.
Of course, under HTTP/1.0, it is possible for commands such as "POST" to be composed of multiple lines, but these commands are not supported by this example.
Therefore, we input reader and instructs the socket to send back acknowledgment of any data coming in and then to silently discard it.
The next step is to process the HTTP request and work out if the operation is a valid one.
We determine first if the line is null and disconnect if it is.
As we accept GET requests, we check for a "GET" command, and process the request.
If not, the request method sent by the browser is not supported, and we can send back an "HTTP 501 Not Implemented" response.
Finally, the output writer and stream are flushed to make sure that the client receives a response.
The task of processing the GET request is somewhat more complex, and involves some fancy string processing.
While some Java programmers will be comfortable with processing text strings (indeed, Java is an excellent language for this purpose), others may not have come across this before, and may be unaware of the java.util.StringTokenizer class.
It allows a string to be easily broken into separate pieces, and we use it in this instance to strip off any data (if it exists) after a "?" character.
Remember that additional data can be passed to CGI scripts, or to embedded JavaScript, and we must remove it to determine the actual filename that is being requested.
Finally, we add the requested filename to our document root, as well as an OS-specific file separator if needed (such as "/" on Wintel systems or "\" on Unix systems)
Eliminate any trailing ? data, such as for a CGI // GET request.
We then convert this requested file to an absolute filename, and verify that it isn't out of bounds (for example, that it doesn't use a directory mapping on the server to access another drive, or that it doesn't use path operators such as ".." to look at parent directories)
This is one part of a sequence of conditions that must be tested for, such as the existence of a file, if it can be accessed and if it is a directory request instead of a file request.
Two methods, sendDir and sendFile, are used if it is a successful request—otherwise, the appropriate HTTP error status codes are sent to the browser.
Check to see if request doesn't start with our // document root ....
Breaking the code into two methods (sendDir and sendFile) simplifies things somewhat, as it leads to easier-to-read code.
Since sending a file is pretty much the whole point of HTTP, we'll cover this important method first.
Reading from a file involves the use of a FileInputStream.
We could, if we positively knew that only text data would be encountered, use a FileReader—but often, binary data such as data files and images are sent over HTTP, so we must read and write at the byte level.
Starting by sending a valid HTTP 200 response code, we proceed to read the contents of the file and forward it on to the browser.
We use the byte array method of reading and writing data for improved efficiency.
The final major method of our HTTP handler that must be discussed is sendDir.
The task of sending a directory listing, with hyperlinks to files and underlying subdirectories, involves the use of the File class, to obtain a list of file entries within a directory.
For this method, we will be using a bit of simple HTML, using tables, to create a simple yet readable output.
If you're not familiar with raw HTML, don't panic—the code is very brief, and easily understood when examined piece by piece.
We start by adding a title to the Web page, which is the directory location that is being requested.
Next we create a simple table, which is used to format our data.
The directory location is displayed in a large heading (using the.
This gives us not only whatever files are stored in our directory, but also the names of any subdirectories.
Once obtained, it is a simple process of looping through each element of the array and displaying the output.
If the File object is actually representing a directory, we also add a / to the URL and Dir -> to the displayed name of the entry.
Unlike other examples, running the server involves a little more complexity.
Under some operating systems, such as Unix, many ports are restricted by security settings, or your machine may already have a Web server running.
You must also specify the location of your HTML pages, although for testing you can point it to a directory on your hard drive where you have some images or text documents.
After compiling the Web server, you can run it by typing:
Next, using your browser, enter the URL http://hostname:port/, where "hostname" is the name or IP address of your machine, and "port" is the port you specified when running the server.
If you're not connected to a network, you can use "localhost" as the hostname.
You should see a directory listing and a series of hyperlinks to files and directories.
Click on an image or a Web page, and you'll be able to view them just like a real Web server!
The ultimate end of learning networking is for the programmer to write network applications.
Theory, while interesting intellectually, cannot replace the experience of actually working with and writing network code.
Whether you're writing your own network protocol to suit a special task, or implementing an existing network protocol described by others (such as an RFC), the basics remain the same.
Network communication in Java, at its lowest level, takes place over sockets and involves clients and servers.
You're now armed with the knowledge and skill to write your own network applications.
The HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is perhaps the most prolific network application protocol in the short history of the Internet.
With the possible exception of e-mail, HTTP has changed the face of the Internet more profoundly than any other protocol.
Without HTTP, there would be no World Wide Web, no electronic commerce as we know it today, nor the rapid, phenomenal growth of Internet usage.
In previous chapters, we examined HTTP as an application protocol and constructed a simple Web server that serves up Web pages.
In this chapter, we'll look at the protocol in greater detail, and how it can be used in Java.
Web browsers use HTTP to request files or dynamically generated content produced by CGI scripts, and other server-side applications.
Hypertext documents contain hyperlinks, which are links to other hypertext documents and files.
The World Wide Web is a collection of hypertext documents, stored on a wide variety of Web servers and accessed by an even larger number of Web browsers and HTTP clients.
When an HTTP client, such as a Web browser or a search engine, needs to access a file, it establishes a TCP connection to the Web server (which, by default, uses TCP port 80 for communication)
The client sends a request for a particular file, and receives an HTTP response, which will often include the contents of the file, as shown in Figure 9.1
The response includes a status code (indicating the success or failure of a request), some HTTP header information such as the length of the content and its type, and, if appropriate, the file contents.
Each request is for a single file; if subsequent files are needed, additional connections must be made.
The response includes a status code (indicating the success or failure of a request),some HTTP header information such as the length of the content and its type,and,if appropriate,the file contents.Each request is for a single file;if subsequent files are needed,additional connections must be made.
To understand what type of communication takes place between an HTTP client and a Web server, let's look at a sample transaction in which a browser fetches a Web page (see Table 9-1)
Highlighted in bold font is the client request; the server sends the remainder of the transaction.
To fetch the file index.html in the root directory of a Web server, an HTTP client establishes a TCP connection to port 80 and makes an HTTP request.
The server processes the request and outputs an HTTP response.
Don't be concerned if the meaning of each part of the request and response is not clear to you at this point.
The client request and server response are described later in the chapter; for now it is simply important to be aware of what a simple HTTP request/response looks like.
A Web client, connecting to the Web server via a TCP socket, will send an HTTP request and then read back a server response.
Earlier versions of HTTP used a simple request format, which would only fetch a resource from the server.
Under HTTP/1.0, which most, if not all, servers and clients now support, there are three types of requests that a client application can issue to a Web server:
The most common HTTP request is a GET request, which fetches a resource from the Web server.
Each request can also include header fields, which give the server more information about the client.
When a client needs to retrieve a resource from a Web server, it uses the GET request.
The GET request takes two parameters: the pathname of the resource and the version of HTTP being used.
While often only files are requested, it is possible to invoke a CGI script or server-side application.
There are two major variations on the GET request, depending on which protocol version of HTTP is in use.
To issue the older-style request, no HTTP version is specified.
When this style of request is made, no header fields will be returned in the HTTP response.
This type of request is rare, and clients should use the HTTP/1.0 version if at all possible.
Sometimes a client will be interested in information about a resource but not the resource itself.
For example, if a large file is already cached, the client may want to know if it has been modified recently.
If so, a new copy would be downloaded, and if not, the cached version would be used.
Some clients may be unable to process certain types of content, so they may want to know the MIME content type of the resource.
The HEAD request takes the same parameters as a GET request, and will return a normal HTTP response with information about the resource stored in header fields.
However, no actual content will be returned, conserving network bandwidth.
One of the great advantages of the Web is that Web sites can be interactive.
The earliest form of interactivity came in the form of CGI scripts, written in languages such as Perl.
However, there must be a way for the browser to pass information from the user to the Web server.
While it is possible to use the GET request to encode such parameters, limitations on the length of a URL are restrictive.
A better way is to use the POST method, which allows clients to send much more information (including large files) to server-side scripts and applications.
The POST request method has a format similar to a GET request.
After header fields have been sent, however, the client sends an entity body, which contains CGI parameters and other information.
When the entity body is complete, the server will process the information and output an HTTP response.
Table 9-2 gives a sample transaction, in which a browser submits information from an HTML form using the POST request method.
Attached to any request may be header information and a number of optional fields.
Header fields are sent after the request line, and are terminated with a carriage return/linefeed.
If no headers are specified, the carriage return/linefeed must still be sent.
The HTTP specification defines several header fields that can be used, and clients are free to add their own.
If a field is not supported, it will be ignored—no error condition should be generated.
The major fields a client is likely to use are covered below.
Persistent client-side objects (cookies) are small pieces of data sent by a Web server and echoed back on every subsequent request.
Cookies are used for tracking client requests and customizing server output for individual users.
Not every client supports cookies, and cookie support can be disabled for privacy and security in most clients.
The "From" field specifies the e-mail address of the user in control of the client.
For example, a search engine that sends out requests to remote Web sites may include a contact e-mail address, to help establish contact if the search engine runs wild and requests too many pages in a given period.
A client that has already requested a resource can use this header field to check whether the resource has been updated.
For example, a Web browser that caches pages may send the "IfModified-Since" field, specifying the date when the resource was last requested.
If the resource has been updated, the server will output a normal response and a normal entity body.
If, however, it has not been updated, the server will issue a response with a status code of 304 and no entity body.
This is an extremely important field for the server, and is often stored for statistical purposes.
The "Referer" field specifies the URL that linked to the request URL.
If an HTTP client follows a link to a new page, the "Referer" field will specify the page that linked to it.
This information is useful for Web masters, as it shows which pages are linking to a site and which search engine queries delivered specific users.
Most Web browsers send this field automatically, without the ability to disable it.
The "User-Agent" field identifies the type of HTTP client that is making the request.
This information can be collected for statistical purposes or used to customize the response issued by the server.
For example, an opportunistic Web master might output many random keywords to search engines in an effort to boost the traffic on his or her site.
Real" users would see the original page, since the server would read a browser identification string and not a search engine identification string.
Such behavior on the part of a Web master is frowned upon, however, and would eventually result in penalization, or blacklisting of the site.
Developers of HTTP clients should always include this field, to identify the software that is making the request (by default, Java sends a field that identifies HTTP requests as being made by a Java application)
Some sites, strange as it may seem, use this information to blacklist certain HTTP clients such as search engines, so it is important that a legitimate "User-Agent" field is sent.
By convention, browser applications begin their identification string with the keyword Mozilla, which was the identification string of the Netscape browser.
When a client connects to a Web server, it will send an HTTP request that the server will read and process.
Servers should also support the older HTTP/0.9 simple request, for the purpose of backward compatibility.
In response to a simple request, a server should return only the entity body and no header information.
The status line indicates whether or not a request could be performed successfully.
If a request could not be completed, it also gives an indication of the reason.
The first digit corresponds to an error group, with the two remaining digits indicating a precise error condition.
Each group represents a generic error state (see Table 9-3)
Clients can respond to the first digit (knowing only that an error occurred or that a request was accepted), or they can act based on the type of error that occurred.
The HTTP specification states that this code indicates a partial response (such as header information), but with no entity body.
These status codes are not a valid response for any HTTP/1.0 request and so should be used only in experimental systems, not for production systems.
This is, under ideal circumstances, the most common set of status codes returned.
This indicates that a request was processed and completed without any errors.
Although there are several status codes in this group, the most common will be the 200 status code.
When a resource moves to a new location or a new server, redirection is occasionally used.
When a status code from the redirection group is issued, the client should look for a "Location" header field giving the new location of the resource.
The entity body of the response may also include a hyperlink to the new resource, in the event that the HTTP client is unable to automatically follow redirect requests.
There is also one circumstance in which a redirection status code will be sent, but where no redirection location is specified.
If a client issues a conditional request, by specifying an "IfModified-Since" field in the request header, a 304 status code will be returned, indicating that the resource has not been modified and that the previous cached version should be used.
When an HTTP client sends an incorrect request, a status code from the client error group will be sent.
Reasons for the error can vary, from a bad request, to an invalid URL, to a URL that is forbidden for that client's IP address.
The most common of all client error status codes is 404, indicating that the resource was not found.
Though this is classed as a client error, sometimes a resource is deleted from the server, making invalid a URL that clients have previously accessed.
When a server is overloaded, for example, it can issue a 503 status code.
A server-side CGI script or servlet could malfunction, causing a 501 status code to be issued.
Generally, however, servers are reasonably stable—there are more likely to be client errors than server errors.
The response header is composed of two groups of header fields (either a "Response-Header" field, or an "Entity-Header" field)
In actual practice, the header group names are irrelevant, as the headers are sent together and only the field name is of interest to a client.
Each header field is optional and will not be present in every request.
However, some fields will be present in almost all situations, such as the "Content-Type" and "Last-Modified" fields.
Covering every possible field would be impossible, as servers can add custom fields.
However, the most frequently encountered fields described in the HTTP specification are worth being aware of when writing HTTP clients.
In the case where a redirection status code is specified, the client should fetch the content specified in this header field.
For example, in response to a URL request to http://davidreilly.com/, a redirection to http://www.davidreilly.com/ is made using.
The "Server" field gives information about the server vendor and server version number.
This information often isn't that useful to the client and, as the HTTP specification warns, could represent a security risk.
If a server returns this field, and a known security flaw in that vendor/version combination exists, it may open the server to hostile attack.
This field indicates the number of bytes of the entity body.
Although not strictly necessary, since the client will stop reading when the entity body terminates, this information can be useful when dealing with large file downloads.
At the beginning of the transaction, the client can give the user an estimate of how much content needs to be downloaded, and the time remaining.
If a connection terminates prematurely, the client can detect that the file was not completely downloaded, and attempt the request again.
This field specifies the MIME content type of the entity body.
The MIME content type is divided into two sections, separated by a "/" character.
The first section indicates the general type of the example, the content type of a Web page is text/html, whereas a plain text document is text/plain.
An image in GIF format is of type "image/gif," whereas a JPEG is of type "image/jpeg." The Internet Assigned Number Authority defines MIME content types, and it is best not to assign arbitrary types in production systems.
When a server wishes to prevent caching of a resource for too long a period, it can specify a "useby" date for a resource.
For example, the front page of a news site could specify one hour into the future, to prevent proxy servers (servers that forward HTTP requests on behalf of other machines, such as those trapped within a firewall) and HTTP clients from caching the content longer than an hour.
Some content may also be marked as not cacheable, using the "Pragma" header field (see below)
However, the "Expires" field allows caching for a specified period of time.
The "Last-Modified" field indicates when a resource was last changed or last updated.
This information may be useful to proxy servers and clients, to prevent the downloading of large files that are already cached and have not changed since the last request.
Sometimes a server may wish to prevent caching of a resource entirely.
For example, a page that changes every few minutes (such as a stock-price information page) or that contains sensitive information that would best not be cached by an intermediary proxy server may be marked with the "Pragma" field.
The "Pragma" field can also be used to indicate other restrictions and information on the behavior of clients, though clients are not guaranteed to support such restrictions.
Although not defined in the original HTTP specification, cookies have been quickly adopted by Web browser manufacturers and the Web developer community.
When a server-side application wants to send a cookie to the browser, it adds a "Set-Cookie" field to the HTTP response.
Subsequent requests by that browser will include the cookie, so that the client can be tracked.
Not all browsers have cookies enabled, and server-side applications should be aware that there is no error message sent if a browser does not accept cookies.
The entity body is the stream of bytes that form the actual content of the requested resource.
This content may be static (a file whose content changes infrequently or not at all) or dynamic (a custom server-side response to the client request)
Meta-information about the entity body is contained in entity header fields such as "Content-Type" and "Content-Length."
Java provides extremely good support for the HyperText Transfer Protocol.
While developers are free to write their own HTTP implementations using TCP sockets, the java.net package provides several classes that offer HTTP functionality:
The URL class represents one of the most frequently used address types of the Internet, the Uniform Resource Locator (URL)
URLs can point to files, Web sites, ftp sites, newsgroups, email addresses, and other resources.
In the context of HTTP and this chapter, we'll be dealing with URLs that point to a Web site, but it is important to remember that other network protocols also use URLs.
The URL is composed of several components (shown in Figure 9-2), each of which can be parsed by the URL class and returned separately.
Some components (namely the port and the reference fields) are optional, and will not be present in many URLs.
As mentioned earlier, CGI parameters can also be included as part of the path field.
The URL class can be used to parse URLs, or as an identifier of a remote resource that can be employed (in conjunction with the other Java HTTP classes) to retrieve that resource.
There are six constructors for the URL class; the choice of which to use depends largely on how much control you require over the URL.
If the URL cannot be correctly parsed, a MalformedURLException will be thrown.
However, not every application will have a String representation of a URL.
For convenience, a wide range of constructors is offered, which some developers may find easier to use.
For example, if we had an existing URL of http://somewebsite.com/, and a relative URL of /images/icon.gif, the new URL would be http://somewebsite.com/images/icon.gif.
Any stream handler specified will override the default stream handler of the context URL.
The URL class provides the following methods to parse a URL and extract individual components (such as the protocol or the hostname of the URL), as well as to open an HTTP connection to the resource that it specifies.
If the object is not an instance of the URL class, or if the object does not point to an identical resource, a value of "false" is returned.
The type of object returned will vary, depending on the MIME content type of the remote resource and the available content handlers (classes responsible for processing and retrieving objects from a URLConnection)
As a network connection will be established, an IOException may be thrown.
A null value will be returned if no reference was specified.
The name of this method can be deceiving, though, as no connection will be established until further methods of the URLConnection object are invoked.
This method provides a quick and easy way to retrieve the contents of a URL, without the added complexity of dealing with a URLConnection object.
However, only the protocol, hostname, port, and pathname fields are compared—the reference field of the URL is excluded.
While the equals(Object) method checks that a URL points to the same place in the same file, the sameFile(URL) method does not test where in the file the URL points to.
To demonstrate how the URL class is used, and how it can extract the individual components out of a URL, we'll examine a small application that creates an instance of the URL class from the command-line parameter passed to it.
Catch any thrown exceptions try // Create an instance of java.net.URL.
The example starts by checking that a command-line parameter was passed to the application.
A null value for the command-line parameter would cause a runtime exception to be thrown.
Next, the application begins a try/catch block, which is required since the URL constructor can throw an instance of java.net.MalformedURLException.
If an exception is thrown, it will be caught, and a warning sent to the user before terminating.
Catch any thrown exceptions try // Create an instance of java.net.URL.
The code to create a URL instance is relatively easy.
Once you have a URL, you can look at the various components of which it is comprised.
The application prints out the protocol, host, port, pathname, and reference of the URL.
Note that the port and reference fields may be blank, so a –1 and null value, respectively, would be displayed in this case.
The URLParser application takes a valid URL as its only parameter.
A valid URL must contain a protocol, hostname, and pathname components, but it does not necessarily need to point to a valid resource.
Thus, the following URLs would be accepted without throwing a MalformedURLException:
To run the URLParser, specify the URL as the only parameter, as follows:
Try running some of the sample URLs, and examine the output for URLs with and without port and reference fields.
The URL class can be used for more than just parsing, however.
There are two URL methods that can assist in retrieving the contents of a remote resource:
For greater control over how the request is made, a URLConnection object created by invoking InputStream, which makes reading a resource simple.
Examine the following application, which will fetch a URL passed as a command-line parameter.
Catch any thrown exceptions try // Create an instance of java.net.URL.
MalformedURLException indicates parsing error catch (MalformedURLException mue) return; // IOException indicates network or I/O error catch (IOException ioe) return;
You may notice some similarity between this example and the previous one.
Since we're working with the same URL class, the code to check for a valid parameter, to construct the URL, and catch a possible MalformedURLException remains the same.
Observant readers may notice an extra catch statement, which handles any network or I/O errors.
This is necessary in case the host machine could not be contacted or is invalid.
Remember that a MalformedURLException will not be thrown if the hostname is invalid, only if the URL syntax was not followed.
IOException indicates network or I/O error catch (IOException ioe) return;
Inside the try/catch block, the application creates a new URL object and calls the could not be opened, throws an IOException)
The method returns an InputStream, which can then be used for reading from the remote resource.
While we could read directly from the input stream, one byte at a time, a more efficient alternative is to connect another stream, one which is better suited to the task at hand.
In this case, we use a BufferedInputStream and read a byte at a time.
However, a DataInputStream or a Reader object could just as easily have been used.
While this example is quite simple, it provides only limited control over the connection.
For example, what is the MIME content type of the resource? By reading from an InputStream, we lose some of the details.
The URLConnection class, as we'll see in Section 9.2.4, offers greater control over requests and responses.
Simply specify a valid URL as the only command-line parameter, either of a local machine on your network or a Web site, if you are connected to the Internet.
The URLConnection class is used to send HTTP requests and read HTTP responses.
URLConnection has methods that allow you to connect to a Web server, to set request header fields, to read response header fields, and of course, to read the contents of the resource.
The single constructor for URLConnection is marked as a protected method, meaning that only a class in the java.net will return a URLConnection instance.
The URLConnection provides many methods, the most important of which are listed below.
Some are shortcuts to other methods (such as response header fields)
For completeness, even advanced methods are included, although for normal programming you would likely use a small subset of these.
The act of creating a URLConnection object does not establish this connection, and until this method is executed, the remote host will not be contacted.
Before invoking this method, the client application should specify any request headers, as these will be sent when the in order to complete their task.
The method checks the MIME content type of the resource and attempts to find a suitable content handler.
If no type of information is available, the guessContentTypeFromStream(InputStream) method may be used as an indication.
If no such header field was specified, a value of zero will be returned.
The state of this default value determines the "allowUserInteraction" value of all future URLConnection objects that are created.
The state of this default value determines the cache flag value of all future URLConnection objects that are created.
By default, this value will be "true," unless modified by the setDoInput(boolean) method.
By default, this value will be "false," unless modified by the setDoOutput(boolean) method.
If no such header field was specified, a value of zero will be returned.
FileNameMap interface, which is used to map MIME content types to filenames.
String getHeaderField(int n)— returns the value of the nth response header field, or null if this exceeds the number of response header fields available.
Unlike an array, which is zero-indexed, the first element of the set of header fields will have an index value of one.
String getHeaderField(String field)— returns the value of the specified header field name, or null if no such field exists.
If a parsing error occurs (such as an invalid date or a missing header field), the default_value will be returned.
If a parsing error occurs (such as an invalid number), the default_value will be returned.
String getHeaderFieldKey(int n)— returns the name of the nth response header field, or null if this exceeds the number of response header fields available.
Unlike an array, which is zero-indexed, the first element of the set of header fields will have an index value of one.
If a connection cannot be established, an IOException is thrown.
In addition, if the connection does not support reading, an UnknownServiceException is thrown.
If no such header field was specified, a value of zero will be returned.
If a connection cannot be established, an IOException is thrown.
In addition, if the connection does not support writing, an UnknownServiceException is thrown.
Permission object, representing the security permissions required to access a resource.
If a specialized subclass of URLConnection is written, this method should be overridden.
Developers won't normally need to use this method, unless special security policies are specified for an application.
String getRequestProperty(String key)— returns the value of the specified property, and null if no such property exists.
If "true," caching will be used wherever possible, and if "false," a new request will be sent each time.
The method does a nondestructive read, in an attempt to determine the content type if header information does not specify it.
A content handler factory is responsible for creating the appropriate ContentHandler based on the MIME content type of the resource.
If a content handler already exists, or if the current security manager prohibits the operation, an error will occur.
The state of this default value determines the cache flag value of all future URLConnection objects that are created.
If "true," caching will be used wherever possible, and if "false," a new request will be sent each time.
The example below shows how to use the URL Connection class to retrieve a resource and to determine its MIME content type and the length of the resource.
Since we still use the URL class, some of the code is similar to previous examples.
Check for valid number of parameters return; // Catch any thrown exceptions try // Create an instance of java.net.URL.
Create a URLConnection object, for this URL // NOTE : no connection has yet been // established.
Display, if available, the content length System.out.println ("Content-length: " +
Read the contents of the resource from the // connection.
Check for EOF break; else // MalformedURLException indicates parsing error catch (MalformedURLException mue) return; // IOException indicates network or I/O error catch (IOException ioe) return;
We start by checking for a valid parameter, and create a URL instance, as in previous examples.
Create a URLConnection object, for this URL // NOTE : no connection has yet been established.
This can be advantageous, as it allows us to set any request header fields we need.
For a simple example like this, however, this functionality is not needed, so we can connect to the Web server immediately, which sends a request for the URL associated with this connection.
Once the connection is established and the request sent, a response will be issued by the Web server.
This response will include a variety of header fields, as discussed earlier in the chapter.
The most important field of all is the "Content-Type," which tells an application whether the resource is text, an image, a data file, or some other resource.
The application could read this data by calling the URLConnection.getHeaderField(String) method and passing a value of "Content-Type." However, a shortcut method exists that makes for more readable source code.
Another important piece of information is the length of the resource.
Large files can take minutes or even hours to download, and the user benefits from knowing the length of the resource at the beginning of the transaction.
This information is provided in the "Content-Length" header field, and a shortcut method exists for this data that converts it to an int value.
After displaying the length, the application pauses, to allow the user time to read it before displaying the requested resource.
The next step is to get an InputStream to the contents of the resource.
Just like a URL object, URLConnection provides a method to create an InputStream for reading a resource.
Once an InputStream has been obtained, the resource is read in the same way as the previous example.
The chief difference between FetchURL and FetchURLConnection is that more information about the resource was provided.
The URLConnection class can be used for more than just content type and length information, however.
In the next examples, we'll unleash the power of the URLConnection class.
This application takes the same command-line parameter as the previous example.
Specify a valid URL as the only command-line parameter, either of a local machine on your network, or a Web site, if you are connected to the Internet.
The application will issue an HTTP request, the display the MIME content type and length of the resource and then the resource itself.
In the previous example, you learned how to use the URLConnection to fetch HTTP resources, and how to determine the length and MIME content type of a resource.
However, there are many more HTTP response header fields to examine, and you can also modify HTTP request header fields to make it possible for server-side applications (such as CGI scripts, Active Server Pages, or Java servlets) to customize their output.
In this next example, you'll learn how to modify request properties, and how to get response header fields.
Catch any thrown exceptions try // Create an instance of java.net.URL.
Create a URLConnection object, for this URL // NOTE : no connection has yet been established.
Set some basic request fields // Set user agent, to identify the application // as Netscape compatible connection.setRequestProperty ("User-Agent",
Set our referer field - set to any URL you'd // like connection.setRequestProperty ("Referer",
Search through each header field, until no // more exist.
Goto the next element in the set of // header fields i++; // Pause for user // MalformedURLException indicates parsing error catch (MalformedURLException mue) return; // IOException indicates network or I/O error catch (IOException ioe) return;
Like previous examples, this example uses an instance of the URLConnection class to issue HTTP requests.
The chief difference here is that, before any request is sent, custom HTTP request fields are added.
These header fields provide additional information to server-side applications, which can then be used to customize the HTTP response.
When a Web browser sends a request, it identifies itself by sending a "User-Agent" field in the request.
Well-behaved HTTP clients do the same, and it is often advantageous to pose as a Web browser by including the Mozilla keyword in the identification string and then appending a legitimate-sounding application name, since CGI scripts and servlets sometimes offer different output depending on whether it's an HTTP agent like a search engine or an actual browser.
Other request fields can also be set, such as the referring URL and the cache flag, which determines whether or not a unique request will be sent each time to the server.
Create a URLConnection object, for this URL // NOTE : no connection has yet been established.
Set user agent, to identify the application as Netscape compatible connection.setRequestProperty ("User-Agent",
Once the request settings are made, the URLConnection object can send the request.
If a call to receive them and they will not take effect.
After connecting and sending the request, the application displays the request fields to the user.
The next set of header fields displayed by the application is from the server response.
In the previous section, the names of the request fields were known.
It would be impossible, however, to know the name of every field that might be sent back by a server.
Not all servers support the same fields, and some server-side applications may send back custom fields that a client has never before encountered.
The URLConnection offers several methods that provide access to request fields, two of which support a numerical index value rather than a key name.
This allows us to read the nth key, and to iterate through every element in the set of header fields.
The program prints out both the name of the field and its contents.
Search through each header field, until no more exist // Get the name of this header field.
Get the name of this header field // Output header field key, and header field value.
Goto the next element in the set of header fields i++;
Finally, the application pauses to allow the user to read the header fields, and then terminates.
The actual contents of the resource are not displayed, although code for this exists in the previous example.
This application takes the same command-line parameter as previous examples.
You should pass a valid URL as the only command-line parameter, either of a local machine on your network, or a Web site, if you are connected to the Internet.
Try URLs pointing to different Web servers, to see a variation in the type of headers returned.
The application will issue an HTTP request, display all request and response headers, and then terminate.
Any protocol for which a registered protocol handler exists can be fetched in this manner, including the File Transfer Protocol (FTP)
But there is no notion of a request method, or a response status code, in these other protocols.
Indeed, many servers output custom pages, designed more for end users than for HTTP client applications.
However, there is no uniform error message placed in the message body that is standard across all Web servers.
The solution is to read the response status code (discussed earlier in this chapter), as it is the only appropriate way to determine the success or failure of requests.
Though support for HTTP-specific functionality did not exist in earlier versions of Java, as of JDK1.1 there is a solution in the form of the HttpURL Connection class.
This class extends the URLConnection class, and provides additional methods and fields that encapsulate HTTP functionality.
There are no public constructors for the HttpURLConnection class, just as in the case of URLConnection.
The single constructor for HttpURLConnection is marked as a protected method, meaning that only a class in the java.net package can create one.
Instead, you should URLConnection class is the superclass of HttpURLConnection, and if the protocol field of the URL is set to HTTP, this method will actually return an HttpURLConnection instance.
To gain access to HTTP-specific functionality, you should test to see whether or not the object is an instance of HttpURLConnection; if so, the object must be cast as such.
Even if an HttpURLConnection object is expected, it is good programming practice to test the class type using the instanceof keyword.
If (for example, if a different protocol to HTTP was specified by the URL), a runtime error will occur and the application may not handle it gracefully.
The HttpURLConnection class inherits all of the functionality (including fields and methods) of its parent class, URLConnection.
It also adds additional functionality, in the form of methods that allow greater access to HTTP features, and static fields that represent common HTTP states.
The HttpURLConnection class defines many static fields, which represent HTTP status codes.
While an application can refer to a status code by a numerical value, these fields may make for more readable code.
The following fields are all public static final int fields.
To conserve space, the public static final access identifiers have been omitted.)
This may indicate that it has been cached locally or read from a third-party copy, and may represent a subset or superset of fields.
For example, if data was sent to a server-side application but no entity body was needed, this code might be returned.
For example, an HTML form should be cleared, to allow new data to be input by the user.
Partial requests occur when an HTTP client has part, but not all, of a resource, and wishes to request only the missing data.
If a resource is modified, the new resource will be sent and this status code will not be issued.
When a resource is located elsewhere, a "Location" entity field will be sent, along with a 3xx redirection status code, but in the case of multiple choices of location, this status code will be issued.
The new location of the resource should be used in future.
This is often issued in response to a POST request, which processes the information and redirects to a standard page.
The "Location" field indicates the location of the proxy server, which should be used to reissue the request.
This status code is reserved for the future, and is not in common use.
A list of allowed methods will be specified in the "Allow" response header field.
This is a slight, but important, difference between that of status code 401
For example, an access conflict might occur if a resource is being modified, and a request to read that resource occurs.
This is similar to the 404 status code, but indicates that the resource is gone forever.
To conserve space, we have not listed here methods inherited from the URLConnection class.
If a connection has not yet been established, or no errors have yet occurred, this method returns null.
Returns "true" if redirection will occur automatically, and "false" if not.
This must be invoked prior to the security manager, a SecurityException will be thrown.
This method is not supported, a ProtocolException will be thrown.
The method name must be capitalized, as the protocol names are case sensitive.
Returns "true" if using a proxy server, "false" if not.
This next example shows how to read the status code and message of a response.
Most URLs will generate a "normal" response, with a 200 status code and a normal entity body.
However, in some situations (for example, if a resource has moved or if the request method is not supported) this will not be the case.
Create a URLConnection object, for this URL // NOTE : no connection has yet been established.
Check to see if connection is a HttpURLConnection instance if (connection instanceof java.net.HttpURLConnection) // Yes...
Check to see if a proxy server is being used System.out.println else System.out.println.
If a 'normal' response // Notify user System.out.println ("Normal response returned : " + else.
Output status code and message System.out.println ("Abnormal response returned : "
Pause for user else return; // MalformedURLException indicates parsing error catch (MalformedURLException mue) return; // IOException indicates network or I/O error catch (IOException ioe) return;
The program starts by creating a URL object, and from this, a URLConnection object.
If the protocol being used to request the resource is HTTP, then the URLConnection will also be an instance of the HttpURLConnection class.
It is not advisable to presume that this will always be the case, however.
A guard statement checks to see if it is an HttpURLConnection object and performs a casting operation.
If not, an error message is displayed and the program terminates.
Create a URLConnection object, for this URL // NOTE : no connection has yet been established.
Check to see if connection is a HttpURLConnection instance if (connection instanceof java.net.HttpURLConnection) // Yes...
If all proceeds according to plan, the application now has an HttpURL Connection, and the extra HTTP-specific functionality it gives.
Before a connection is established, it is possible to modify the properties of the request.
For example, a different request method could be used, or the "follow redirection" flag could be modified.
So that users can see the redirection status code, automatic redirection is disabled by the application, and then the connection is established.
Once a connection has been established, all sorts of useful information becomes available, such as the status code and message and whether or not a proxy server is being used.
The application checks for the presence of a proxy server, and displays it to the user, by using the boolean.
Check to see if a proxy server is being used else.
This is the most useful information of all, as it tells a client whether or not a request was successful and, if it was not successful, gives an indication of why.
If not, the status code and message are displayed to the user, and an application could take further steps, such as resending a request or following a redirection notice.
The UsingHttpURLConnection application accepts as a single parameter the URL of the resource you want to investigate.
The Common Gateway Interface (CGI) is an interface that allows HTTP clients, such as Web browsers and other user agents, to pass information back to a server for processing.
When you use a search engine, buy a book at an online store, or read a customized newspaper tailored to your interests, your browser is using CGI to communicate with a server-side application.
Earlier, we briefly discussed the POST method, which is used by HTTP clients to send information.
The GET method may also be used to transmit information, although there are limitations on the length of data that may be passed.
Let's look further at how GET and POST are used to send CGI requests to a server-side application.
The GET method is used to request documents, images, and other files, and may also be used to call up server-side applications.
Normally, when called, data will be passed to the CGI application using a query string.
A query string is a string that is appended to the end of a URL in order to pass additional information such as the results of an HTTP form.
Let's look at an example query string, to better understand their syntax.
Because we know the format of a URL, we see nothing unexpected in the example before the "?" character in the middle.
But what does the question mark signify, and what comes after it? That's the query string.
Everything that follows the question mark is a CGI parameter.
You'll notice too that instead of the expected space between one's first and last names, there is a percentage sign and a number.
This has been encoded, as Web browsers and CGI scripts don't easily handle certain ASCII characters (such as spaces, punctuation, and line separators)
At the other end in the CGI script, URL decoding restores the characters to their original state.
Since query strings are passed as a URL, they may be viewed by look- ing at the URL location string within a browser.
In addition, the length of query strings is limited; long forms should be passed using the POST method.
Sending data with the POST method removes the length limitations of GET and allows more complex data to be sent.
While a query string may still be sent, data such as entire files and serialized objects may also be included.
Query strings should still be URL encoded, and are sent by writing to the output stream of a URLConnection object.
The format of a POST request was covered earlier, in Section 9.1.3, and the syntax of a query string is discussed above.
Sending a GET request in Java is simple, almost as easy as reading the contents of a static resource such as a Web page.
The only difference is in the construction of the URL.
To do this, all the parameters must be put together and their values encoded and then appended as a query string to a URL.
Create a buffered reader, for reading CGI // parameters from the user.
Send the GET request, and display output try // Construct the url object.
The main work of the application takes place during the construction of the GET request.
First, a base URL is read from the command line, and the argument string (representing a query string) is assigned a question mark value.
The next step is to read command-line parameters from the user, which is fairly self-explanatory.
When a full-stop character is encountered, no more parameters are read and the request is sent.
A URL object is constructed representing the GET request, and then the results are displayed to the.
To run the application, you must specify the URL of a CGI script or Java servlet (discussed in Chapter 10), and then enter one or more CGI parameters when prompted.
To finish entering parameters, simply enter a "." character as the field name.
If you don't have a CGI script you can use, a good start would be the AltaVista search engine (or your preferred search engine if you want to try something different)
At the time of writing, a query could be sent by invoking the http://www.altavista.com/cgi-bin/query cgi-script, with a parameter "q" that represents the search query.
For example, to search for "java networking" you might type the following command line and responses to questions:
A POST request is a bit more complex than a simple GET request.
With a GET request, parameters are appended to a URL, but a POST request requires you to write parameters to the output stream instead use a URLConnection object.
Here is the code for a simple example that sends a POST request.
No query string question mark required, so use // a blank string.
Get a URLConnection object, to write to POST // method.
Writing to the POST method of a CGI script or servlet is accomplished by using a URLConnection object.
Before the connection can be established, however, some initialization work needs to be done.
By default, a URLConnection allows read access but no write access.
You can override these defaults, by calling the setDoInput(boolean) and setDoOutput(boolean) methods, to allow data to be written as part of the POST HTTP request.
Now, the POST data must be sent to the CGI application by obtaining an OutputStream instance connected to the remote service.
You can then connect any output stream or writer to it, so that the CGI parameters may be sent.
Get an output stream for writing // Create a print stream, for easy writing.
Once sending the data for the request is complete, the results may be displayed by obtaining an InputStream to the URLConnection.
The request is sent, and the results returned just as if a GET request had been made.
To run the application, you must specify the URL of a CGI script or Java servlet that supports the POST method.
Not every script will, so you may need to search on your local intranet, or the Internet, for a suitable script.
Once one is selected and passed as a command-line parameter, the application will prompt you for one or more CGI parameters.
To finish entering parameters, simply enter a "." character as the field name.
One good example for demonstrating this is Sun's "Backwards" CGI script, at http://java.sun.com/cgi-bin/backwards.
For example, to see what "Java Duke" looks like spelled backward, try.
Another good example is the Altavista search engine, which allows you to execute queries.
You can perform searches on your own, by passing a query string to the search engine.
For example, to search for "Java networking" as a term, you could pass the following data to Altavista:
This would also be a good starting point for an application of your own that searched the Web by harnessing existing search engines.
These types of applications are called metacrawlers, and are a useful way of aggregating results from many search engine databases.
The HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is one of the most frequently used application protocols, and can be employed to access both static content (such as pages and files) and interactive content powered by scripts or servlets that use the Common Gateway Interface (CGI) for communication.
Although the performance of simple tasks such as accessing the content of resources is relatively easy, HTTP is capable of complex and rich behavior.
For example, additional functionality can be added to HTTP through the use of request and response fields, and more information can be obtained about a connection by examining status codes.
Java provides excellent support for HTTP in the form of the java.net.URL, java.net.URLConnection, and java.net.HttpURLConnection classes.
These make it possible to write HTTP clients capable of a wide range of behavior, such as interacting with CGI applications.
However, they are only useful for client-side HTTP programming; for server-side HTTP applications, a different technology is used, that of Java servlets (discussed in Chapter 10)
Java Servlets This chapter provides an introduction to server-side programming in Java.
Thus far, we've dealt with stand-alone applications, and many readers may already be familiar with applets for clientside programming.
One of Java's strengths as a programming platform lies in server-side programming, as a substitute for CGI scripts that interact with browsers and users to provide a custom experience.
Here, as in applications, Java software is less restricted in its activities, having access to local resources and fewer security restrictions than the traditional applet.
These technologies are suited to mediumto large-scale application development, and include topics such as Enterprise Java Beans (EJBs), Java Server Pages (JSPs), and much more.
Such technologies merit book-length coverage in their own right, and are beyond the scope of an introductory network programming book such as this.
While the dynamic and interactive nature of Java applets makes them an attractive choice for Web masters, applets are severely limited by security policies.
Such policies, aimed at protecting users, can be restrictive for developers who want to create full-fledged applications that run inside a browser.
When combined with slow loading times and lack of universal Java 2 support across all browsers, the advantages of server-side content often outweigh those of Java applets.
Previously, developers would need to master one or more scripting languages, such as Perl or VBScript for Active Server Pages, to create server-side applications.
Such approaches often tied developers into a particular Web server framework or operating system.
This was frustrating for developers, as they no longer had access to the rich Java API they were familiar with, nor the freedom of portable application development.
Fortunately, Sun Microsystems perceived the need for server-side Java, and servlets were born.
While Sun currently provides only a baseline and HTTP implementation of servlets, it is possible to use servlets with other request-response protocols.
Java servlets are server-side applications that execute similar to CGI scripts, but without a separate process for each request (which consumes both CPU and memory resources)
Servlets are multithreaded, and thus can share resources across servlet instances.
The performance increase that comes with using a compiled language over a scripting interpreter also makes servlets a good choice for developers.
Of course, the most obvious benefit for servlet developers is that servlets are written in Java.
All of the features of the Java language, such as object orientation, portability, the extensive API including networking support, and ease of use, are provided, without the security restrictions that applets are subject to.
When a client sends a request to a servlet-enabled server that invokes a servlet, the server first checks to see if the servlet is loaded.
If it is not, the servlet class is loaded and a new instance is.
This lifecycle is relatively simple, as shown in Figure 10-1
Figure 10-2 shows the process by which a servlet is loaded, initialized, and made ready to service client requests in a servlet-enabled Web server.
As already mentioned, different servers may use servlets over different protocols, such as HTTP or even FTP, since the specification was written to be generic.
By default, Sun provides an HTTP implementation only for servlets, and in this chapter we will use that implementation.
However, the information can apply to other servlet implementations as well, and readers may find them of use in developing their own custom protocol servers.
Servlets rely on classes defined in the javax.servlet and javax.servlet.http packages.
These packages are a standard extension to the Java API, and ship with the Java Servlet Development Kit (JSDK) as well as many servlet-compatible Web servers.
The starting point for a servlet is the servlet interface.
This interface provides the basic structure methods for servlets, such as the initializing, service, and destruction methods.
It also provides structure methods for accessing the servlet's context and configuration, as shown later in this chapter.
By default, servlets that implement this interface use a shared threading model that drastically improves the performance of servlets to handle large numbers of requests.
An alternative single-threading model, discussed in Section 10.6, is also available.
As we shall see, this can be a flawed model and should not be used under normal circumstances.
In the shared threading model, the servlet engine creates a single instance of each servlet that is shared by all requests.
The engine then creates a thread for each request that comes in and passes the servlet's service method to the threads.
What this means is that class and instance variables cannot be presumed to be thread-safe variables.
Constants, of course, are immutable and are not of any concern.
Using method variables and passing those variables around in method calls does not require much more work and only necessitates that class and instance variables be avoided.
The example below shows the proper use of badVariable and goodVariable.
For the actual creation of a servlet, Sun provides the GenericServlet and HTTPServlet classes.
These classes function very much like applets, in that they can be extended to provide additional functionality.
The GenericServlet provides a generic protocol-independent starting point with simple However, if the goal is to write an HTTP servlet that is used for the Web, the HTTPServlet class should be extended; it extends from GenericServlet and provides the starting point for Web servlets.
For each of the major HTTP request types, there is a corresponding handler function that can be overridden by developers.
Table 10-1 shows the mapping between HTTP requests and servlet methods.
Developers are free to override one, several, or all of these handler functions.
However, if a handler function is not overridden, it will return an HTTP_BAD_ REQUEST error response.
For example, suppose a form servlet supported only the POST request.
Here is a sample of what such a transaction might look like.
Since all of the handler functions take the same parameters (an instance of HttpServletRequest and HttpServletReponse), it is easy to write a handler for either GET or POST that passes control off to the other.
This means that if you accidentally specify the wrong HTTP method in your HTML forms, the servlet will handle it gracefully.
For example, to pass GET requests off to a POST method, you could add the following lines:
Once a servlet handler function is called, it can respond to the request and its parameters, perform some processing, and then output a response.
However, developers should be mindful of the fact that each servlet is capable of servicing multiple requests simultaneously, so normal thread safety issues apply.
Finally, when the Web server shuts down or terminates a servlet due to inactivity after a specified close open files, remove temporary or unnecessary data files, commit changes to disk, or close open network/database connections.
The GET and POST HTTP request types are used to retrieve data from a Web server, and both have the ability to encode parameters into the request.
The only major difference between them is that GET has a limit of 255 characters for its parameters, while POST has no limit.
A GET request involves using a question mark in the URL to signify that the rest of the URL includes encoded parameters.
An example of a simple GET request that encodes parameters is:
A POST request, on the other hand, does not modify the URL that is requested.
Instead, the POST request is followed by the actual parameters that are sent to the server-side script or servlet.
An example of a simple POST request, which performs the same job as the previous GET request, is the following:
According to the Java Servlet API, these two types of requests are treated completely differently.
However, these differences are transparent to the developer, as the API provides generic methods that abstract the differences between them.
In many cases, it is easier to write a single handler than to divide the work between a GET and a POST handler.
Assuming that you would like your servlet to be easily manageable, you can refer both GET and POST requests to a single handler, as shown in this example:
For example, you could use PUT to send a new file across, and DELETE to remove one.
Of course, their usefulness in most applications is limited—the thought of someone overwriting your page, uploading a rogue servlet, or deleting your Web site is fairly frightening.
Nonetheless, some readers might want to co-opt the methods for other uses, or may want to create a controlled upload system for their Web site.
According to the HTTP/1.1 specification in relation to the TRACE result, "The TRACE method is used to invoke a remote, application-layer loop-back of the request message." It is used as a diagnostic test of the servlet request, and it is not necessary to override this method to provide an implementation.
If an override is necessary for debugging purposes, however, Sun has included this capability.
The OPTIONS request type in HTTP is used to probe the server in general or a single servlet about what types of HTTP request types are valid.
For instance, when you extend the HTTPServlet and implement only the doGet method, you receive the following output from an OPTION request:
Unless you plan on adding extra methods that are beyond HTTP/1.1, you do not need to implement this method.
To run a servlet, you need either a Web server with servlet support or a servlet engine that will augment an existing server.
A popular choice of Web server for Java developers is the iPlanet Web Server.
However, Sun and Netscape created an alliance, and the iPlanet Web Server took the best of both these servers.
It includes built-in support for servlets and other dynamic server-side features.
Another common choice is the free open-source Apache, which runs on a variety of Unix platforms as well as Windows.
Apache can be easily modified to support servlets with the Apache JServ add-on.
If you're using other servlets, products like JRun and ServletExec can add support to existing servers, such as Netscape servers, O'Reilly's Website, and Microsoft's Internet Information Server (IIS)
If you're planning on doing a lot of servlet development, it might be wise to evaluate several options.
Originally, the choice for many developers was the standard promoted by Sun, the Java Web Server (http://www.sun.com/software/jwebserver/index.html)
However, it has been discontinued, and instead Sun recommends the use of the iPlanet Server (either Enterprise or FastTrack Edition)
Of course, during development, you don't need a high-powered (and possibly expensive) Web server.
Sun includes a basic Web server with servlet support as part of the free Java Servlet Development Kit (JSDK), which can be downloaded from the Sun Microsystems Web site.
Downloading this tool will be essential for using the examples throughout this chapter; however, you can use other servlet engines if you wish.
Earlier editions of the Java Servlet Development Kit used a tool called servletrunner to start a simple Web server with a servlet engine.
Later editions use a slightly different method of running the tool, using the startserver and stopserver batch scripts.
Readers are free to use these, or any other servlet engines that they choose.
Where the command servletrunner is used, the command startserver can be used interchangeably with later editions.
A servlet engine ships as part of the Java Servlet Development Kit (JSDK), which is available from the Sun Microsystems Web site at http://java.sun.com/products/servlet/archive.html.
You will need to download either to use the examples here.
The servletrunner application is located in the /bin/directory of your Java Servlet Development Kit installation, whereas the startserver script will be located in the installation's root directory.
Before running it, however, you will need to install your servlet (in this case, HelloWorld)
Verify that your classpath is set correctly and that JSDK is correctly configured.
If you have difficulty, consult the JSDK instructions (setup may vary slightly across different versions)
For example, with the JSDK2.0 and a Wintel platform, you would add to your autoexec.bat file the following statement:
With the JSDK2.1 installation and a Wintel platform, you would add to your autoexec.bat file this statement:
Refer to your preferred servlet engine's installation guide for precise instructions, as they vary from version to version and platform to platform.
You will need to rerun your autoexec.bat file to make sure that the classpath is set.
Copy the compiled HelloWorld.class into the appropriate directory of your JSDK installation.
For example, under JSDK2.0 you would copy servlets into the /examples/ directory, in order for servletrunner to find them.
Under JSDK2.1, however, you would place your servlets under the /examples/WEB-INF/servlets directory.
If you're using servletrunner and not startserver, you will need to open the servlets.properties file, located in the /examples/ directory of your JSDK installation.
You can use any text editor you want, such as notepad, edit, pico, or vi.
Add the following entry to your servlets.properties file, so that your servlet has a name associated with it.
Under JSDK2.1 you need to run the startserver script to get the server running, and stopserver to shut it down again.
By default, servletrunner will bind to port 8080 of the local machine.
Run the servlet from the next section (HelloWorld), or come back to this section once you've looked at your first servlet's code.
Load a Web browser (any browser will do), and enter the following URL:
Remember that if you customize the port number, you will need to change the URL.
You should see a window similar to that shown in Figure 10-3
Installing your first servlet can be a little tricky, but after doing it once, the process becomes simple.
Let's take a look at a simple servlet, which outputs the proverbial "Hello World" message.
We start by importing the servlet and I/O packages, and extending javax.servlet.http.HttpServlet, which provides our servlet with a basic.
Since HttpServlet offers a default service method, all we need to do is write a handler function to output our message.
HttpServletResponse res) throws IOException // Code for response goes here.
The first thing that our servlet must do is to specify the MIME content type of the response.
In this case, HTML output will be returned, but there is no reason why different text formats, images, or binary files can't be returned by a servlet.
Next, we request an output stream and series of writers that will be used to send HTML data.
Since JDK 1.1.x and higher versions are commonly available, this code will use the Writer classes, which provide efficient character-based communication.
A simple buffer will be put in the middle, using a BufferedWriter.
Finally, we write our message and close the output streams and writers.
The listing below shows the source code for the HelloWorld servlet example.
The next step is to install the servlet on a Web server and run it.
HttpServletResponse res) throws IOException // Set the content type of the response.
Get output stream and writers new BufferedWriter ( new OutputStreamWriter // Print HTML page header.
The steps and procedures for running a normal servlet were outlined previously (to install the appropriate servlet engine, compile and copy class files to the appropriate path, modify the appropriate properties file, and finally to start the servlet engine)
Running this example should produce the "Hello World" message rendered in HTML.
Earlier in this chapter you learned that servlets can be shared between a potentially large number of client requests that come in through the Web server.
For this reason, great care should be used to provide thread-safe code in the servlet.
The reasoning behind this is to alleviate the amount of memory needed and reduce unnecessary CPU usage.
In some instances, a servlet developer may find that providing thread-safe code is neither possible nor desirable.
In this case, there is the option of implementing the SingleThreadModel interface.
This interface is without any explicit operations, and is used only as a marker for the Web server.
However, the servlet developer should note that this interface wipes out one of the major benefits of servlets over ASP, CGI, and Fast-CGI implementations, and also that the various implementations of servlets may handle this interface slightly differently or ignore it totally.
An example of how to do this is shown here.
Instead of sharing one global instance of the servlet, the single-threaded model requires a fresh servlet instance to be created for each request.
The servlet instance will be destroyed like any other class instance once the request is finished, or may be pooled by the servlet container in some implementations.
Therefore, a servlet should probably clear its instance variables to the defaults after the request has been handled.
This allows for the use of instance variables in the servlet.
However, class variables will still not be safe to use, as they may be accessed by other servlet instances running on the same JVM.
Since the servlet will most likely be destroyed after a request, there will be no way to access the instance variables afterward, and hence a clever servlet developer will quickly realize that the SingleThreadModel is only a crutch for servlet developers and should seldom be used.
The ServletRequest and HttpServletRequest classes hold all of the accessible information about the client and the server.
HttpServletRequest is a subclass of ServletRequest, and is passed to each servlet handler method (such as doGet(..), doPut(..), etc.) This request may be in the form of parameters, a text or binary body, or a combination of both.
In addition, most of the standard CGI environment variables have corresponding methods that REMOTE_ADDR.
Apart from the CGI variables, these classes provide methods to obtain the data that form the request.
In an HTTP request, these could be the decoded form of the query string in a GET request or the key-value pairs of a POST request.
Another possibility is for the data to be binary or character data in a form request, such as an uploaded file.
Other methods also exist that give other details about the request, such as the cookies sent in the request and HTTP headers.
ServletRequest Parameter and Miscellaneous Methods Method  Function GetScheme  Returns the schema of URL, such as http GetInputStream  Returns an input stream pointing to the body GetParameter  Returns a single parameter value GetParameterValues  Returns an array of parameter values GetParameterNames  Returns an array of parameter names GetReader  Returns a reader pointing to the body GetCharacterEncoding  Returns the encoding for the body GetContentType  Returns the MIME type of the body GetCookies  Returns the cookie objects GetRequestURI  Returns the part of the URL that points to a file or.
Section 10.13) isRequestedSessionIdFromCookie Returns if the session ID is from a cookie.
One important note is that parameter names can map to multiple values, so unless you are sure that a parameter will have only one entry, you should use getParameterValues.
An example of how to display a few of these to the servlet engine's System.out for diagnostic purposes is shown below.
After compiling and installing RequestDisplay in the preferred servlet engine or servletrunner, for testing purposes, you'll notice that whenever a request for this servlet is made, diagnostic information about the request will be displayed, such as the type of browser.
If you view it in another browser, you will notice a different version number.
For servlets, the ServletResponse and its subclass HttpResponse are two of the most vital classes.
These classes perform the function of sending the MIME-encoded data back to the client.
This class supports both writers (for communicating text-based characters) and output streams (for sending back binary data), as well as enabling the setting of content length and type parameters.
The HttpResponse class adds extra functionality in that it allows the developer to set the HTTP status codes, add cookies and headers, and encode session IDs into URLs.
For the moment, we'll leave these advanced topics for Section 10.12, but it is important to be aware of the versatility of the HttpResponse class.
One important fact to note is that once data is flushed or written the first time, many of the options of a servlet become locked; this is especially so with respect to the HttpResponse class.
The reason for this is that most servlet engines first automatically write out the HTTP header information for you, and changing horses in midstream is impossible.
Since your data has been partially written out and the HTTP protocol does not have any way to alter this, any newly changed values are ignored.
One way to make sure this doesn't happen is to use an internal buffer in the servlet that you write to and only write that buffer out at the very end.
A second is to specify the settings of an Http Response before actually writing out any data.
Another point is that you should not close the output stream or writer, as this may close the socket connection from the client before data is written.
Some servlet engines may do their own internal buffering, and problems could arise with performance of the close operation.
Response Methods Method  Function GetOutputStream  Returns an output stream pointing to the client GetWriter  Returns a writer pointing to the client GetCharacterEncoding  Returns the encoding that the writer uses SetContentLength  Returns a value to use as the length of the output SetContentType  Returns the MIME type to use for the output AddCookie  Adds a cookie object ContainsHeader  Checks to see if a header has been set yet SendError  Sends an error response and message back to client SendRedirect  Sends a redirect response and URL back to client SetHeader  Sets a response header setIntHeader, setDateHeader Helper methods for headers SetStatus  Sets the HTTP status code encodeURL, encodeRedirectURL Encodes session ID into URLs.
In addition to methods, the HttpResponse class defines integer static constants for each of the HTTP/1.1 status codes.
An example of a servlet that modifies response settings is offered below.
After compiling and installing RequestDisplay in your preferred servlet engine, or servletrunner for testing purposes, you'll see that output of this servlet is actually rendered as text by your browser instead of HTML.
This is because the MIME content type was modified to accommodate text/plain, instead of text/html output.
As a servlet developer, you can take advantage of the ability to specify configuration parameters.
This makes your software more flexible and eliminates the need to hardwire specific parameters into your code.
An example of this could be the username and password for a database connection, or the filepath to a local directory where data is stored.
To allow access to these parameters, you need to obtain a reference to the ServletConfig instance that is associated with your servlet.
Once this reference is obtained, you have access to the parameters by calling the getInitParameter method and specifying a parameter name.
In cases in which you do not know the names of the parameters, you can call getInitParameterNames( ), which returns an enumeration of available parameters.
The following code prints the names of parameters out to a servlet's output stream:
This class allows access to servlets that can pose a potential security risk but at times may be necessary, and offers other useful functions.
The ServletContext provides a variety of information that is useful for debugging (such as logging an error condition to a server log), as well as for diagnostic purposes.
The logging methods allow entries to be made in the server-wide servlet log file.
You can provide a simple message, or a message with an exception, such as this:
Obtains the version number of the Servlet API supported by the server.
String getMimeType( String )  Obtains MIME type of a file using server's internal mapping from file extension to MIME type.
Obtains a resource either as a URL or as an open InputStream to the resource.
The getMajorVersion and getMinorVersion methods are used to obtain the servlet version number, such as 1.2
The getMimeType method is used to obtain the MIME type of a file.
This can be used to determine what should be sent to the client as the MIME type in a documentation check-in/check-out system.
The getRealPath method is used to provide access to convert from a "virtual" path (such as /categories/index.html) into a "real" local URL.
The following code snippet illustrates this in action, by resolving the real path of a file.
Converting virtual paths to real paths can, if the operation is not carefully controlled, pose a grave security risk by allowing access to local files, particularly if a symbolic link or path operator such as ".." is used.
This should not deter one from using such a design, but developers should be aware of the potential misuse of such operators.
When writing servlets that are anything more than the most basic of handlers, the developer will find that exceptions and errors can occur during runtime.
For example, the servlet may be temporarily unavailable due to administrative action or failure to obtain certain resources such as memory or access to an external server.
As with any Java application, a good knowledge of exception handling is required to create for the user a stable and robust system.
This can be used to cover problems in most cases, and is normally handled correctly by the servlet engine, allowing other servlets to continue running.
The next exception is the UnavailableException, which is a subclass of ServletException.
This exception states that the servlet cannot handle a particular request.
It has two forms: one for permanent and the other for temporary unavailability.
A nonpositive result should be given when there is no estimation, such as due to an external resource.
In 1992 Netscape Communications Corporation publicly released the specifications of a revolutionary concept that would forever shape and improve the quality of Web applications.
The original HTTP protocol developed at CERN in 1989 was not designed for the purposes for which it is used today, such as the shopping cart model employed in many electronic commerce systems.
As a protocol, it was designed using a stateless model to allow CERN's scientists to access static and linked hypertext documents, mostly research papers.
Today, a lot of the WWW's content is dynamic, such as customized news reports, Web portals, and shopping in online bookstores such as Amazon.com.
The basic idea of cookies is to get around HTTP's stateless nature.
The cookie concept does this by allowing an application to store small amounts of state data in the user's client.
This could be used to store small amounts of preferences in the browser or a unique session identifier that allows the servlet to look up state information stored on the server side for the user.
Each cookie is a name-value key pair with optional attributes.
The use of large numbers of cookies should be discouraged—large state data should be stored server-side and accessed via a unique identifier.
In the Java Servlet API, Sun designed a special class that represents a cookie that is (surprise!) named Cookie.
Servlet developers should note that cookies affect caching, and currently this class does not support the HTTP/1.1 caching controls.
One important note for servlet developers is the common bane of all cookie-based applications.
During initial development, Netscape reasoned that forcing users to accept cookies would raise privacy issues that could destroy the widespread adoption of cookies.
In recognition of these concerns, the ability to ignore cookies was included in their popular Web browsers.
Since then, most if not all HTTP clients provide the ability to ignore cookies as well.
What this means to servlets is that when a cookie is set, the user may accept it unconditionally, accept it on a percookie basis, or reject all cookies completely.
When this happens, you will need to use alternative methods of storing state, such as URL rewriting.
Servlets provide the ability to let you know if cookies will not be accepted.
A cookie consists of the following variables with the appropriate GET and SET methods for each:
Certain variables listed above exist only in version 1 of the cookie specification, such as displayed comments.
The following example shows how cookies can be used by servlets to store state data.
Check to see if no cookies exist // For each and every cookie, display name and // value.
Add new cookie, so we have more than one cookie // stored in browser res.addCookie(new Cookie("previouscookie",new.
Add cookie to save state data for next invocation res.addCookie(new Cookie("cookie",new.
At the beginning, we retrieve an array containing every cookie accessible by the servlet.
None, one, or many cookies may be accessible, so we must first check to see if the array is empty before attempting to access any of its elements.
Next, for demonstration purposes we echo to the browser any cookies that have been detected by the servlet.
In this example, we'll be using two cookies (one for the current value of the counter and one for the previous value), but your applications may use more, subject to the size limits imposed by browsers.
For each and every cookie, display name and // value.
After compiling and installing CookieTest in your preferred servlet engine, or servletrunner for testing purposes, you'll notice that a cookie will be added to your browser.
If you have security settings on your browser to reject cookies, or to manually accept/deny cookies, this will be easier to observe.
Please note that to see the cookie change, you'll need to "refresh" your browser so that a new HTTP request is sent to the servlet.
As mentioned in Section 10.12, the HTTP protocol uses a stateless model.
Since useful HTTPbased applications will most likely require a stateful model, this presents an interesting challenge.
During development of servlets, Sun wisely decided to provide a helper system to allow the base HTTP servlet and the servlet engine behind it to handle the issues of keeping track of state over multiple HTTP requests.
This class, by default, determines whether cookies or URL rewriting should be used.
In the case of URL rewriting, a unique session identifier can be sent as a parameter between the server and client in each request-response for the servlet.
HTTPSession also provides other helper methods to keep track of data that should be held across sessions.
Sessions have automatic timeouts and can be created or cancelled at will by the servlet.
To obtain an HTTPSession, the getSession method of the HTTPServletRequest class is called.
The getSession(boolean createNewSession) method is used to obtain the current servlet session, and if the createNewSession flag is set to "true," one is created if none already exists.
This method returns a reference to a session, which can then be used to obtain information about it, and get, set, or remove values associated with it.
The ability to obtain the session ID from this class also exists.
These values are stored on the server side in the servlet engine with a unique identifier being sent across only to the client.
Therefore, you should feel safe in storing confidential or secure information in the session without worrying about it being detected by packet sniffing between server and client.
However, the potential for abuse still exists, if the session identifier and IP address of the client are forged.
If no existing session, add a visit value of one // to a new session.
Modify a session variable, so state // information is changed from one invocation to // another of this servlet.
After compiling and installing SessionServlet in your preferred servlet engine, or the JSDK for testing purposes, you'll notice that on the first time through, a brand-new session is created.
Subsequent executions, however, will contain previous state data, with a counter being incremented along with the last accessed time.
Please note that to see the output change, you will need to "refresh" your browser so that a new HTTP request is sent to the servlet.
Java servlets provides a comprehensive and well-thought-out API that offers a powerful and flexible alternative to the CGI API.
This technology gives far superior performance and built-in support for cookies and session management.
The ability to extend servlets to other transport mechanisms is another plus for this API.
How to create a new session, and to add data to it, for more advanced servlets.
Remote Method Invocation (RMI) is a distributed systems technology that allows one Java Virtual Machine (JVM) to invoke object methods that will be run on another JVM located elsewhere on a network.
This technology is extremely important for the development of large-scale systems, as it makes it possible to distribute resources and processing load across more than one machine.
Objects can invoke methods on other objects located remotely as easily as if they were on the local host machine (once a few initialization tasks have been performed)
Figure 11-1 provides an example of this process, whereby an object running on one JVM invokes a method of an object hosted by another.
Communication like this does not have to be a one-way process, either—a remote object method can return data as well as accept it as a parameter.
Invocation of a method on a remote object, executing on a remote machine.
Each RMI service is defined by an interface, which describes object methods that can be executed remotely.
This interface must be shared by all developers who will write software for that service—it acts as a blueprint for applications that will use and provide implementations of the service.
More than one implementation of the interface can be created, and developers do not need to be aware of which implementation is being used or where it is located.
Even before object-oriented programming, technologies existed that allowed software to call functions and procedures remotely.
Systems such as remote procedure calls (RPCs) have been in use for years and continue to be used today.
Remote procedure calls were designed as a platform-neutral way of communicating between applications, regardless of any operating system or language differences.
Java is, after all, a platform-neutral language, and conceivably would allow Java applications to communicate with Java applications running on any hardware and operating system environment that supported a JVM.
The principal difference between the two goals is that RPC supports multiple languages, whereas RMI only supports applications written in Java.
With the introduction of the Java 2 Platform, Enterprise Edition, a new technology known as RMI over IIOP helps bridge the gap between RMI and CORBA systems.
This technology allows for translation between RMI services and CORBA services, via the Internet Inter-ORB Protocol (more detailed information on IIOP is provided in Chapter 12)
In general practice, however, RMI is used primarily with Java-only systems.
Beyond the language that either system supports, there are some fundamental differences in the way that RPC and RMI work.
Remote method invocation deals with objects, and allows methods to accept and return Java objects as well as primitive datatypes.
Remote procedure calls, on the other hand, do not support the notion of objects.
Messages to an RPC service are represented by the External Data Representation (XDR) language, which abstracts the differences between byte ordering and structure of datatypes.
Only datatypes that are definable by XDR can be passed, and while this amounts to a large variety of primitive datatypes and structures composed of primitive datatypes, it does not allow objects to be passed.
Many RPC services already exist, and RMI is not compatible with these legacy applications.
However, it is easier for Java developers to use RMI, rather than using a library that implements RPC, as services can exchange entire objects, rather than just individual data fields.
By writing distributed systems in RMI, however, the ability to develop systems in other languages is lost.
There are, however, distributed systems technologies that do support other languages.
The most popular choice for this is the Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA), which the Java 2 platform supports.
Systems that use RMI for communication typically are divided into two categories: clients and servers.
A server provides an RMI service, and a client invokes object methods of this service.
Included as part of the Java platform is an application called rmiregistry, which runs as a separate process and allows applications to register RMI services or obtain a reference to a named service.
Once a server has registered, it will then wait for incoming RMI requests from clients.
Figure 11-2 illustrates services registering with a single RMI registry.
Associated with each service registration is a name (represented as a string), to allow clients to select the appropriate service.
If a service moves from one server to another, the client need only look up the registry again to find the new location.
This makes for a more faulttolerant system—if the service is unavailable because a machine is down, a system administrator could launch a new instance of the service on another system and have it register with the RMI registry.
Providing the registry remains active, you can have your servers go online and offline or move from host to host.
The registry doesn't care which host a service is offered from, and clients get the service location directly from the registry.
Before any remote method invocation can occur, however, the client must have a remote object reference.
This is normally obtained by looking up a service in the RMI registry.
The client application requests a particular service name, and receives a URL to the remote resource.
Remember, URLs are not just for HTTP—most protocols can be represented using URL syntax.
The following format is used by RMI for representing a remote object reference:
Once an object reference is obtained (either through the rmiregistry, a custom lookup service, or by reading an object reference URL from a file), the client can then interact with the remote service.
The networking details of requests are completely transparent to the application developer—working with remote objects becomes as simple as working with local ones.
This is achieved through a clever division of the RMI system into two components, the stub and the skeleton.
The stub object acts as a proxy object, conveying object requests to the remote RMI server.
Remember that every RMI service is defined as an interface, not as an implementation.
The stub object implements a particular RMI interface, which the client application can use just like any other object implementation.
Rather than performing the work itself, however, the stub passes a message to a remote RMI service, waits for a response, and returns this response to the calling method.
The application developer doesn't need to be concerned about where the RMI resource is located, on which platform it is running, or how it will fulfill the request.
The RMI client simply invokes a method of the proxy object, which handles all the implementation details.
Figure 11-3 illustrates how this is achieved; shown is an RMI client invoking an object method on the stub proxy, which conveys this request to the remote server.
At the RMI server end, the skeleton object is responsible for listening for incoming RMI requests and passing these on to the RMI service.
The skeleton object does not provide an implementation of an RMI service, however.
It only acts as a receiver for requests, and passes these requests on further.
After a developer creates an RMI interface, he or she must still provide a concrete implementation of the interface.
This implementation object will be called by the skeleton object, which invokes the appropriate method and passes the results back to the stub object in the RMI client.
This model makes for much simpler programming, as the skeleton is separated from the actual implementation of the service.
All the developer of the server needs to be concerned about is some brief initialization code (to register a service and accept requests), and providing an implementation of the RMI service interface.
With respect to the question of how messages are sent, the answer is fairly straightforward.
The skeleton, once it is created, listens for incoming socket requests issued by stubs.
Parameters in an RMI system are not limited to primitive datatypes—any object that is serializable can be passed as a parameter or returned from a remote method.
When a stub passes a request to a remote skeleton, it must known as data marshalling.
At the skeleton end the parameters are reconstituted to form primitive datatypes and objects, which is known as unmarshalling.
For this task, specialized subclasses of the ObjectOutputStream and ObjectInputStream classes are used, to read and write the contents of objects.
Parameters are normally passed by value in this case, unless the parameter is itself a reference to a remote object.
Any system that uses RMI will use a service interface.
The service interface defines the object methods that can be invoked remotely, and specifies parameters, return types, and exceptions that may be thrown.
Stub and skeleton objects, as well as the RMI service, will implement this interface.
For this reason, developers are urged to define all methods in advance, and to freeze changes to the interface once development begins.
It is possible to make changes to an interface, but all clients and servers must have a new copy of the service interface, and code for the stubs and skeletons must be rebuilt.
All RMI service interfaces extend the java.rmi.Remote interface, which assists in identifying methods that may be executed remotely.
To define a new interface for an RMI system, you must.
Only methods defined in a java.rmi.Remote interface (or its subclasses) may be executed remotely—other methods of an object are hidden from RMI clients.
For example, to define an interface for a remote lightbulb system (a high-tech version of the traditional on-off switch for a networked world), we could define an interface such as the following:
The interface is identified as remotely accessible, by extending from the Remote interface.
Each method is marked as public, and may throw a java.
In an RMI client, a stub object that implements this interface will act as a proxy to the remote system—if the system is down, the stub will throw a RemoteException error that must be caught.
If a method is defined as part of an RMI interface, it must be marked as able to throw a RemoteException—if it is not, stub and skeleton classes cannot be generated by the "rmic" tool (a tool that ships with the Java SDK which automates the generation of these classes)
Methods are not limited to throwing only a RemoteException, however.
They may throw additional exceptions that are already defined as part of the Java API (such as an IllegalArgumentException to indicate bad method parameters), or custom exceptions exception, if it could not be successfully activated.
Once a service interface is defined, the next step is to implement it.
This implementation will provide the functionality for each of the methods, and may also define additional methods.
However, only those methods defined by the RMI service interface will be accessible remotely, even if they are marked public in scope or as being able to throw a RemoteException.
For our lightbulb system, the following implementation could be created.
Boolean flag to maintain light bulb state information // Remotely accessible "on" method - turns on the light // Turn bulb on.
Remotely accessible "off" method - turns off the light // Turn bulb off.
Locally accessible "getBulb" method, returns state of // bulb return lightOn;
However, a support class exists that provides all the necessary functionality for exporting an object remotely.
When implementing an interface, the class should extend the java.server.UnicastRemoteOb ject class—this saves significant time and effort and provides for simpler code.
Extending from UnicastRemoteObject is the only RMI-specific code that needs to be written for a service implementation.
As can be seen from the code, there is very little work that needs to be done to create RMI service implementations.
Methods defined in the service interface must be implemented (or the class would fail to compile until implemented or marked abstract), but beyond that there is no actual networking code required.
This means that even developers not experienced with networking could contribute to RMI systems, although writing code for a server and client requires somewhat more effort.
The stub and skeleton classes are responsible for dispatching and processing RMI requests.
Once a service implementation exists, the rmic tool, which ships with the JDK, should be used to create them.
The implementation and interface should be compiled, and then the following typed at the command line:
For example, if the class files for the RMILightBulb system are in the current directory, the following would be typed to produce stub and skeleton classes:
They can be copied to a local file system, or distributed remotely via a Web server using dynamic class loading (discussed in Section 11.10.1)
The RMI server is responsible for creating an instance of a service implementation and then registering it with the remote method invocation registry (rmiregistry)
This actually amounts to only a few lines of code, and is extremely easy to do.
In small systems, the server could even be separation of classes is a cleaner design.
Registration format //registry_hostname :port /service // Note the :port field is optional "/RMILightBulb";
The lightbulb server defines a single method, main, which allows it to be run as an application.
The application encloses almost all of the code in a try { ..
The most likely error to occur is for a RemoteException to be thrown, if the service could not be started or if the server is unable to register with the rmiregistry.
The next step is to create an instance of the RMI lightbulb service defined by the RMILightBulbImpl class.
The constructor for this class takes no parameters and is simple to.
Once the service has been created, the application obtains a remote reference to the newly created lightbulb service and displays its contents so that it is possible to see exactly where the service is located.
Each service binds to a local TCP port through which it is located, and the reference is composed of the hostname and port of the service.
The final step is to register the service with the rmiregistry, so that other clients can access it.
This registry could be located on any computer on the local network, or on the Internet, or it could be found on the current host.
By default, the server will attempt a registration on the local machine, but if the hostname of a registry is specified on the command line, this setting will be overridden.
Registration format //registry_hostname:port /service // Note the :port field is optional.
The registration details include the location of the registry, followed by an optional port and then the name of the service.
Using static methods of the class java.rmi.Naming, which is responsible for retrieving and placing remote object references in the registry, we register the service so that clients can access it.
The details, represented by our registration string, are passed to the Naming.
We pass the service created earlier, and the service becomes bound to the registry.
The binding process creates an entry in the registry for clients to locate a particular service, so that if the service is shut down, it should of course unbind itself.
If no errors occur, the service is then available for remote method invocation.
Writing a client that uses an RMI service is easy compared with writing the service itself.
The client needs only to obtain an object reference to the remote interface, and doesn't need to be concerned with how messages are sent or received or the location of the service.
To find the service initially, a lookup in the RMI registry is made, and after that, the client can invoke methods of the service interface just as if it were a local object.
The next example demonstrates how to turn a remote lightbulb on and off.
Registration format //registry_hostname (optional):port /service "/RMILightBulb"; // Lookup the service in the registry, and obtain // a remote service.
See if bulb has changed System.out.println ("Bulb state : " +
See if bulb has changed System.out.println ("Bulb state : " + catch (NotBoundException nbe) System.out.println ( catch (RemoteException re) catch (Exception e)
As in the lightbulb server, the client application must be careful to catch any exceptions thrown at runtime, if the server or rmiregistry is unavailable.
It also needs to create a URL to the registry and service name, which by default will point to the local machine, but can be overridden by a command-line parameter.
The code for this is similar to that in the server, and for this reason is not repeated here.
Once a URL to the registry entry has been created, the application attempts to look up the location of the service and obtain an object reference to it, by using the Naming.lookup(String) method.
An explicit cast is made to the RMILightBulb interface; if no such interface is found, a NotBoundException will be thrown and caught.
Lookup the service in the registry, and obtain a remote // service.
Here the networking code ends and the service code begins.
Each of the three methods is tested, and the changes in bulb state displayed to the user.
Once this is done, the application will terminate, its task complete.
Running any RMI system takes a little care, as there is a precise order to the running of applications.
Before the client can invoke methods, the registry must be running.
Nor can the service be started before the registry, as an exception will be thrown when registration fails.
Furthermore, the client, server, and registry need access to the interface, stub, and skeleton classes, which means they must be available in the class path, unless dynamic loading is used (discussed in Section 11.10)
This means compiling these classes, and copying them to a directory on the local file system of both client and server (as well as the registry, if it is located elsewhere), before running them.
Remember to run the rmic tool over the RMILightBulbImpl class, to generate stub and skeleton classes before copying the class files.
The following steps show how to run the lightbulb system, but apply to other RMI systems as well.
Copy all necessary files to a directory on the local file system of all clients and the server.
Change to the directory where the files are located, and run the rmiregistry application (no parameters are required), by invoking the following command: rmiregistry.
In a separate console window, run the server (specifying if necessary the hostname of the machine where the rmiregistry application was run): java LightBulbServer hostname.
In a separate console window, and preferably a different machine, run the client (specifying the hostname of the machine where the rmiregistry application was run): java LightBulbClient hostname.
You will then see a message indicating that the bulb was activated and then switched off using RMI.
Now that you're familiar with the basics of RMI and how to write an RMI service, server, and client, let's look at the packages and classes that comprise the RMI subset of the Java API.
The two most commonly used are java.rmi and java.rmi.server, but it's important to be aware of the functionality provided by the remaining three.
Activation allows a service to be started on demand, rather than running continually and consuming system resources.
Just as objects can be garbage-collected by the JVM, distributed objects may be collected when clients no longer maintain a reference to them.
There are one interface, three classes, and a large number of exception classes defined by this.
The java.rmi.Remote interface is unusual, in that it does not define any methods for implementing classes.
It is, instead, used as a means of identifying a remote service.
Being an interface, it cannot be instantiated (only a class that implements an interface may be instantiated)
However, an implementing class may be cast to a Remote instance at runtime.
When creating a service that extends the java.rmi.Remote interface, you should be aware that methods must declare a throws clause, listing at least java.rmi.RemoteException, and (optionally) any application-specific exceptions.
This is not declared in the API documentation for the Remote interface, but is a condition imposed by the rmic tool.
This condition is needed, as a client that invokes a remote method may not be able to connect to the RMI service (due to firewall/network issues, or if the server is inactive)
By declaring a throws clause, clients that use the service are forced to catch and deal with the RemoteException, rather than having it surprise users at runtime.
This class represents a serialized object, using the same mechanism for serialization as used in marshalling and unmarshalling parameters and return values.
Objects serialized in this way have the codebase of their class definition files annotated, so that they can be dynamically loaded by RMI clients or servers.
The Naming class offers static methods to assign or retrieve object references of the RMI object registry (rmiregistry)
Each method takes as a parameter a Java string, representing a URL to a registry entry.
All methods provided by the Naming class have public access modifiers.
MalformedURLException, java.rmi.RemoteException— inserts a registry entry (specified by the URL string) for the remote service into the registry, and "binds" the entry to that object.
If the remote service is already bound, the operation is not permitted, an invalid URL is specified, or the registry is not available, an exception will be thrown.
If an invalid URL is specified, or the registry was not contactable, then an exception will be thrown.
This reference may then be cast to a particular RMI service interface (for example, an RMILightBulb, as used earlier in the chapter)
If the operation is not permitted, the registry entry does not exist, or the registry is not contactable, then an exception will be thrown.
RemoteException— modifies an existing registry entry, or creates a registry entry if one does not exist, for the specified remote object.
If the operation is not permitted, an invalid URL is specified, or the registry is not available, an exception will be thrown.
If removal of the entry is not permitted, an entry for that service does not exist, an invalid URL is specified, or the registry is not available, an exception will be thrown.
All RMI servers and clients that support dynamic class loading (discussed in Section 11.10) will require a security manager to be registered with the JVM.
For convenience, an RMI-specific manager is provided that protects rogue code from initiating network connections, masquerading as servers, or gaining file access.
This is a more restrictive form of security than that imposed on applets, but may be modified to grant additional privileges by using a security policy file.
The default action of each method is to throw a SecurityException, unless additional privileges have been granted by a security policy.
The number of methods of any security manager is extremely large and not particularly relevant to a networking text.
However, more information about these methods may be found in the Java API documentation.
An AccessException may be thrown by the Naming class to indicate that a bind, rebind, lookup, or unbind operation cannot be performed.
If a remote object is already bound to a registry entry, or if another object has already bound that service name, then AlreadyBoundException class is used to indicate that the bind operation could not proceed.
The RMI service could unbind and attempt the bind operation again, or it could use the rebind method of the Naming class.
This exception class represents an inability to connect to a remote service, such as a registry.
Similar to the ConnectException class, this represents an inability to connect to a service to execute a remote method call.
This class represents an error that has occurred during the marshalling of parameters for a remote method call, or when sending a return value.
For example, if the server connection is disconnected while writing arguments, this may be thrown.
If it occurs at the client end, it is impossible to tell whether the method was invoked by the remote system—a subsequent method invocation may actually cause the method to be invoked twice.
While not always significant, it is something that developers should be mindful of, if the method causes state information to change.
If an attempt to invoke a remote method is made, and the object to which the reference points no longer exists, a NoSuchObjectException may be thrown.
This indicates that the method call never reached the object, and may be transmitted at a later date (or to another machine), without a duplicate of the method call being sent.
When attempts are made to look up or unbind a registry entry that does not exist, the NotBoundException class is thrown by the Naming class.
The RemoteException class represents an error that occurs performing a RMI operation.
It is the superclass of many exceptions defined in the java.rmi and java.rmi.server packages.
Representing an error that occurs in an RMI server, this class indicates that the method invocation caused a java.lang.Error to be thrown.
When a method call to an RMI server causes a RemoteException to be thrown by the object implementing the service interface, a ServerException is thrown.
If a stub for an RMI service interface cannot be located on the local file system (or externally, if dynamic class loading is enabled), this exception is used to indicate failure to locate the necessary class definition.
For a remote object to be passed as a reference and unmarshalled, or a remote object method to be invoked, stub class definitions are required.
The UnexpectedException class is used by clients to represent an exception thrown by a remote method that was not declared in the throws clause of the RMI interface.
If a client making a remote method request can't resolve a hostname, the java.
This should not be confused with the similarly named java.net.UnknownHostException, which is not RMI specific.
The UnmarshalException class represents an error during the unmarshalling process, either of arguments or of return values.
If, for example, the class definition for a remote interface could not.
ClassNotFoundException being thrown, it would be represented by an UnmarshalException.
The java.rmi.activation package supports remote object activation, an advanced topic discussed later in the chapter (see Section 11.12)
As the reader is unlikely to use every class and interface from this package, only the most important classes and exceptions are covered.
Readers are advised that activation is an advanced topic of RMI, and is not essential for the development of RMI systems.
Nonetheless, some readers may be interested in learning more about the java.rmi.activation package, or may wish to come back to it at a later time.
Furthermore, only the most important of classes, interfaces, and methods used to create activation RMI systems are discussed.
For further coverage of this package, see the Java API documentation for java.rmi.activation.
This class provides a base from which remote objects that support activation can be built.
Just as the UnicastRemoteObject class provides all of the necessary code to create remote objects, so too does the Activatable class.
Developers creating activatable services must extend the Activatable class, implement a remote service interface, and provide their own implementing methods for that service interface.
All of the constructors for the Activatable class are marked protected, and not used by developers, but there are several useful methods that the reader may want to be aware of.
Unless noted otherwise, all methods of the Activatable class are public.
Activatable objects should not invoke this static method; only nonactivatable objects use this method.
Activatable objects should not invoke this static method; only nonactivatable objects use this method.
An ActivationID object is returned, which uniquely identifies the remote object and contains a reference to the object's activator.
Again, this should only be used by objects that do not extend the Activatable class.
RemoteException— this method is used to register an Activatable object's activation descriptor, which provides essential information to the activation daemon process.
An ActivationID object is returned, which uniquely identifies the remote object and contains a reference to the object's activator.
Again, this should only be used by objects that do not extend the Activatable class.
As a protected field, only subclasses of the Activatable class may access this method, which means that any remote object that extends the Activatable class may access its ID but other objects may not.
ActivationException, java.rmi.RemoteException— notifies the activation system that a previously active object, associated with the specified ActivationID, is no longer active.
If a client issues an RMI request at a later date, the object may be reactivated again.
If the specified activation ID, or the activation group associated with that ID, is already inactive, an exception may be thrown.
If the operation was successful, a value of "true" is returned; otherwise a value of "false" is returned.
ActivationException java.rmi.remoteException— registers an activation descriptor object with the activation system, and returns a stub for the activatable object.
If the activation group associated with the specified descriptor is not known to the activation system, or if the activation system is not running, an exception will be thrown.
This method takes a single boolean flag as a parameter.
If the value of the flag is "true," the object is terminated even if it is still responding to client requests.
If "false" and there are pending requests from clients, the object will not be deactivated.
A boolean flag is also returned by this method—if the operation was successful, a value of "true" is returned, otherwise a value of "false" is returned.
ActivationException, java.rmi.remoteException— removes registration of the object associated with the specified ActivationID from the RMI activation daemon.
An activation descriptor contains information that identifies an activatable object, such as the codebase of the object, class name, and the activation group associated with the object.
Descriptors are registered with an activation system, which uses this information to activate the object in response to a remote method call from a client.
IllegalArgumentException— creates an activation descriptor associated with the specified activation group.
The classname parameter specifies the name of the class, and the codebase parameter specifies a URL to the resource (though this can also be a local file:// URL)
If the activation group is null, an IllegalArgumentException will be thrown.
Flag) throws java.lang.IllegalArgumentException— creates an activation descriptor associated with the specified activation group.
The classname parameter specifies the name of the class, and the code base parameter specifies a URL to the resource (though this can also be a local file:// URL)
The restartFlag parameter specifies whether the object will be restarted when the activator is restarted—if set to a value of "false," it will be started on demand.
If the activation group is null, an IllegalArgumentException will be thrown.
The classname parameter specifies the name of the class, and the codebase parameter specifies a URL to the resource (though this can also be a local file:// URL)
The class name parameter specifies the name of the class, and the codebase parameter specifies a URL to the resource (though this can also be a local file:// URL)
The restartFlag parameter specifies whether the object will be restarted when the activator is restarted.
If set to a value of "false," it will be started on demand.
Methods of the ActivationDesc class are listed below; all are public.
If the specified object is an activation descriptor, and holds identical contents, this method returns "true."
The ActivationGroup class is responsible for creating new instances of activatable objects, and notifying the activation system when objects (and the group itself) becomes active or inactive.
The only constructor for the Activation Group class is protected and thus inaccessible—to create an activation group the createGroup(..) method is instead used, which returns an ActivationGroup instance.
Several methods are provided by this class, but are unlikely to be used by developers.
Instead, the group will be registered with an activation system, which will return an ActivationGroupID.
Just as the activator needs a descriptor, so too do groups require some form of descriptor.
The ActivationGroupDesc class contains information about the group's classname and location.
The developer, however, does not normally control these—the RMI library provides a default implementation.
The ActivationGroupDesc class also makes it possible to specify commandline arguments and system properties for activation groups.
In normal practice, this will not be required, and only experienced activation developers are advised to modify the default settings.
This class serves as a unique identifier for an activation group, and provides a reference to the group's activation system.
The class's single constructor takes as a parameter an ActivationSystem instance with which the group will be associated.
To uniquely identify activatable remote objects, an ActivationID class is used.
Each remote object has a single ActivationID, which contains a reference to the remote object's activator and a unique ID code.
To create an ActivationID, an object must be registered with an activation system; applications should not create new instances of the ID themselves.
The ActivationSystem interface is used to register activation groups, as well as activatable objects.
The ActivationSystem is used to handle tasks related to both the ActivationID and ActivationGroupID objects.
Further usage of this class is described in the section on activatable objects later in Section 11.12.4
ActivationException— a generic exception used by the classes of the activation.
ActivateFailedException— represents the error condition that activation of a remote object has failed.
UnknownGroupException— thrown when an activation group ID is unknown to the activation system, and therefore invalid.
For example, an invalid or expired activation group ID might be stored in an ActivationDesc, and then found to be invalid by the.
UnknownObjectException— similar to the UnknownGroupException class, this is thrown when an activation ID is not recognized by the activation system.
For an activation ID to be valid, the object associated with that ID must be registered with the activation system; otherwise an UnknownObjectException could be thrown when it is used.
The Virtual Machine Identifier (VMID) is used to uniquely identify a client JVM.
As there can be more than one JVM interacting with an RMI service, it is necessary to distinguish between one JVM and another.
An IP address alone isn't always sufficient, either, as one machine can host multiple clients.
Instead, the VMID should be used, which guarantees to offer a unique identifier on the proviso that an IP address for the client machine is available.
There is only one constructor for the VMID class, which accepts no parameters.
The following methods (all of which are public) are defined by the VMID class.
A VMID is guaranteed unique, if and only if an IP address can be determined for the host machine on which it was generated; if not, there is the slight possibility of an overlap between one VMID and another.
When an RMI server creates an object for use by a client, it offers it for a short duration of time (called a lease)
If the client makes further calls, the lease is renewed, but if the lease expires, the object is safe to garbage collect to conserve memory.
The Lease class represents a lease between a server and a client JVM, and stores the lease duration and the virtual machine identifier of the client.
The registry package defines an interface (Registry) for accessing a registry service, and the LocateRegistry class, which can create a new RMI registry (if the rmiregistry application has not been run), as well as locating an existing registry.
This interface defines methods for accessing, creating, or modifying registry entries of an RMI object registry.
Similar method signatures are used for the java.rmi.Naming class, but there are some small changes.
Naming class is designed to support registry entries on any remote registry, whereas the Registry interface deals with a specific registry.
This means that some methods don't require as many parameters, and others don't require a hostname and port to be specified in the URL for the registry entry.
All methods provided by the Registry class have public access modifiers.
MalformedURLException, java.rmi.RemoteException— adds a registry entry matching the specified name.
Note that a service name should be specified, not the URL as used in the Naming class.
For example, to insert the remote lightbulb service created earlier in the chapter, the name parameter would be RMILightBulb.
If the service is already bound, the operation is not permitted, an invalid URL is specified, or the registry is not available, then an exception will be thrown.
If the registry is not contactable, an exception will be thrown.
This reference may then be cast to a particular RMI service interface (for example, an RMILightBulb as used earlier in the chapter)
If the operation is not permitted, the registry entry does not exist, or the registry is not contactable, an exception will be thrown.
RemoteException— replaces an existing registry entry, or creates a new one, and "binds" the specified remote object to the registry entry.
If the operation is not permitted, an invalid URL is specified, or the registry is not available, an exception will be thrown.
If removal of the entry is not permitted, an entry for that service does not exist, an invalid URL is specified, or the registry is not available, an exception will be thrown.
This class can be used to locate a remote object registry or to create a new one.
Sometimes it is more convenient for a registry to be launched by a server, rather than separately in a new window.
The LocateRegistry class defines several public methods, all of which return a Registry instance.
An exception will not be thrown if no such registry exists—this is only an object reference, and the application will only encounter an error if and when the Registry instance is used.
An exception will not be thrown if no such registry exists; this is only an object reference, and the application will encounter an error if and only if it uses the Registry instance.
Even if the hostname is invalid, or there exists no registry at that location, no exception will be thrown, as this is only an object reference.
Even if the hostname/port is invalid, or there exists no registry at that location, no exception will be thrown, as this is only an object reference.
Even if the hostname is invalid, or there exists no registry at that location, no exception will be thrown, as this is only an object reference.
The java.rmi.server package defines a number of interfaces, objects, and exceptions relating to RMI servers and remote objects.
While a number of useful classes are defined, developers do not normally use most of the classes in this package in the production of RMI services.
For this reason, only the most important classes are discussed herein.
The remote reference interface is a handle to the remote object.
Stubs can use a remote reference to issue method requests and to compare two remote objects for equality.
Classes that provide alternate types of socket communication for sending RMI requests should implement this interface, which acts as a factory for producing client sockets.
For example, in a special network environment where TCP communication is restricted by a firewall, or where for security reasons encrypted sockets must be used, a custom socket factory could be produced, so that normal TCP sockets are replaced.
Under normal circumstances, developers will not create custom sockets and socket factories.
If a connection can't be established, an IOException will be thrown.
Classes that provide alternate types of socket communication for listening for RMI requests should implement this interface, which acts as a factory for producing server sockets.
For example, in a high-security network system, or a system that uses an insecure network connection such as a might automatically decrypt communications transparently to the developer, to allow encrypted RMI requests to be sent.
IOException— returns a custom ServerSocket instance, bound to the specified port.
If the service can't bind to that port, an IOException will be thrown.
The RemoteObject class implements the java.rmi.Remote interface, and provides a base template for all remote object implementations.
It overrides several important methods defined in the java.lang.Object class, making them "remote" aware.
If invoked before the object has been exported, a NoSuchObjectException will be thrown.
The RemoteServer class extends the RemoteObject class, and adds additional functionality.
It is also the superclass of the abstract Activatable class, and the UnicastRemoteObject class from which most RMI servers will be extended.
The RemoteServer class provides several methods of use during development (all of which are.
If not called from a thread handling a RMI client, a ServerNotActive Exception will be thrown.
This method assists in adding some degree of security to RMI calls, as servers can handle requests differently, based on the IP address of the client.
However, due to IP spoofing, this may not guarantee the authenticity of a client.
Nonetheless, it may be useful in less secure systems, as well as in logging the origin of RMI requests.
This logging stream is extremely useful—anything written to it includes the time and date automatically, making logging easier on developers.
The RMISocketFactory class implements both the RMIClientSocketFactory interface and the RMIServerSocketFactory interface (both of which are part of the java.rmi.server package)
This class creates the socket used in remote method invocation.
By extending the RMISocketFactory class, and overriding the factory methods defined in the RMIClientSocketFactory and RMIServerSocketFactory interfaces, customized sockets can be used for RMI communication.
For example, encrypted sockets, or sockets that use an alternate transport mechanism for communication (such as piggybacking requests on another network protocol), can be used as an alternative to TCP sockets by registering a new RMISocketFactory.
In the event that the first method fails, the second method is attempted, followed if necessary by the third.
An HTTP connection to the server, using the port number of the service (e.g.,
When a firewall restricts direct TCP access, HTTP is often used.
If an HTTP server is specified as a Java system property, this will sometimes allow a client to break through the firewall.
However, this is not guaranteed to work in all circumstances, and will result in a slower response time.
With respect to constructors, as two methods of this class are abstract (requiring a subclass to implement them), it is impossible to instantiate the RMISocketFactory class.
Instead, a subclass should be implemented and instantiated, then registered as the default RMISocketFactory, by invoking the setSocketFactory(RMISocketFactory) method.
It is advised that only experienced developers create customized sockets and a custom RMISocketFactory.
This class defines the following methods (all of which are public):
Socket createSocket ( String host, int port ) throws java.io.
IOException— returns a Socket instance connected to the specified host and port.
If a connection cannot be established, an IOException will be thrown.
Socket createServerSocket ( int port ) throws java.io.IOException— returns a custom ServerSocket instance bound to the specified port.
If the service cannot bind to that port, an IOException will be thrown.
If no such handler has been assigned, this method returns null.
This failure handler will be invoked whenever an attempt to create a ServerSocket is made but fails.
The failure handler controls whether a subsequent attempt to create a ServerSocket should be made.
By registering a custom socket factory, it is possible to create custom sockets (such as encrypted sockets, compressed sockets, or sockets that use an alternate transport mechanism)
The UnicastRemoteObject provides a base from which remote services can be constructed.
It provides methods to "export" a remote object and make it available for receiving incoming method requests, as well as to "unexport" a remote object and remove it from service.
Generally, the easiest way to develop a remote service is to extend the UnicastRemoteObject class, and to implement the interface associated with the remote service.
All of the required functionality to export objects is provided by the UnicastRemoteObject, which saves considerable time and effort.
The UnicastRemoteObject class provides the following constructors (which may also be called from the constructors of subclasses):
Exception— creates and exports a remote object, using any available server port.
If the object could not be exported, a RemoteException will be thrown.
If the object could not be exported (for example, if the port is already taken by another service), a RemoteException will be thrown.
This allows custom sockets to be used for receiving RMI requests and issuing requests to clients.
The UnicastRemoteObject class provides the following methods (all of which are public):
Not every remote object will support cloning—subclasses may choose to override this method and throw a CloneNotSupportedException.
RemoteException— exports the remote object using any available server port.
If the object could not be exported, a RemoteException will be thrown.
RemoteException— exports the remote object using the specified server port.
If the object could not be exported (for example, if the port was already taken by another service), a RemoteException will be thrown.
If the object could not be exported (for example, if the port was already taken by another service), a RemoteException will be thrown.
The second parameter, a boolean flag, indicates whether or not the object should be forcefully removed.
If set to a value of "true," the object will be deactivated even if there are pending client requests.
If set to a value of "false," the object will only be deactivated if there are no requests pending.
The success or failure of the operation will be returned as a boolean value.
Several server-specific exceptions are also defined by the java.rmi.server package.
Objects are exported via the constructors of the UnicastRemoteObject and Activatable classes, as well as their exportObject(..) methods.
ServerCloneException Class— thrown when an attempt to clone a UnicastRemoteObject (or one of its subclasses) fails.
SkeletonMistmatchException Class— occurs when a call is made to a skeleton but the method signatures have changed (for example, if an out-of-date skeleton class.
SkeletonNotFoundException Class— represents the error condition that a skeleton for a remote object could not be located.
Remote method invocation, during development and testing, runs very smoothly and with very few problems (other than perhaps out-of-date stub files if a service interface or implementation is changed)
However, when it comes to deploying RMI services and clients on a network, some additional complexities may be encountered.
Class definitions for services and clients must be distributed, and there are issues with different JVM implementations (such as a Microsoft JVM versus one from Sun Microsystems) and even between JDK versions.
Finally, applet communication with RMI services is an issue that must be considered during deployment.
The effort required to distribute stub and skeleton classes to every client may be trivial in some situations (such as in a small organization in which only a few clients are going to be using a service)
However, what if a large number of clients are going to be using the service? If a central RMI registry is to be used for all services, and a new service is introduced to the system, stub files for the service must be copied to the classpath of the registry before the server can register.
Clients might submit new tasks, and the remote JVM needs to be able to load the classes.
Restricting a system to defined types only limits its usefulness.
This problem is overcome by employing a technique known as dynamic class loading.
When objects are serialized by stub and skeleton objects, only the contents of the object are sent, not the actual bytecode representing all of the object's methods and member variables.
To do otherwise would slow down the speed of each request and cause unnecessary waste of bandwidth.
A specialized version of the object serialization classes (ObjectOutputStream, and ObjectInputStream) is used by stub and skeleton objects.
In the case of the ObjectOutput Stream subclass, the annotateClass(...) method is overridden to include the location from which the class definition can be located.
A corresponding method (resolveClass) exists for ObjectInputStream that will read the class location.
This means that class definitions can be kept at different locations, and an RMI system isn't limited to storing files in a central location.
During the unmarshalling process, an attempt is made to locate the appropriate class definition locally (see Figure 11-4)
If not available, then an attempt is made to fetch the class definition from the specified location by the RMIClassLoader object.
This allows new behavior to be introduced into a system, but at a penalty.
As a security safeguard, the RMIClassLoader will not fetch class definitions unless a security manager has been registered with the JVM.
Without the presence of a security manager, new class definitions might be sent that could damage the host system or the data contained within it, such as deleting essential files or accessing/modifying sensitive information.
Imagine the damage that could be caused by the introduction of a rogue subclass that overrides methods to introduce dangerous functionality.
Whether it be reading password data from /etc/passwd on a Unix system or executing the "format c:" command on a Wintel host, such effects could be devastating.
For this reason, a security manager must be installed for an RMI system to use dynamic class loading.
The most common security manager used in an RMI system is the java.rmi.RMISecurityManager.
This creates some additional deployment issues with the Java 2 platform that were not present in previous JVMs, however.
Before fetching a class definition, however, the location must be identified.
The way that this location is specified to a client, or the server, is by setting the system property java.rmi.server.codebase.
This should be set to a URL, which points to a codebase directory (just like the codebase of an applet)
From there, the RMIClassLoader may download classes used in the RMI system.
The easiest way to set the codebase would be to use a JVM command-line parameter specifying the property.
For example, to assign a remote codebase to a service called RMIServer, the following syntax would be used:
If the rmiregistry can find class definitions locally, it will override the codebase setting and confuse clients.
If the client is not on the same file system, it will then be unable to locate the classes, and a ClassNotFoundException will be thrown at runtime.
Unsetting the classpath, and running the rmiregistry from a location different from the directory where the server is located will guarantee that this does not occur.
If dynamic class loading is not being utilized, however, the rmiregistry must be able to find the class definitions in the classpath.
While servers can specify a codebase, so too can a client.
If a client sends an object as a parameter that the server is not aware of, the server will be instructed to retrieve the class definition from the client's codebase, which may or may not be the same location as that specified to the server.
For example, to assign a remote codebase to a client called RMIClient, the following syntax would be used:
There are many differences in the support of RMI between the various editions of the Java platform.
These deployment issues can affect clients that use the software, as well as RMI servers that may be located across a wide variety of JVMs running on machines throughout a network.
Despite the fact that the RMI packages are part of the "core" Java API, RMI is not generally supported by Microsoft JVMs.
This means that RMI clients or servers cannot be easily run on these JVMs, making the use of RMI in applets difficult, as Microsoft Internet Explorer is widely used by a large number of Internet users.
An additional download is available from Microsoft to patch the Microsoft JVM to support RMI; however, it is used infrequently and thus installation on client machines can't be guaranteed.
Under JDK1.02, implementations of an RMI service would extend the java.
This class is not available under JDK1.1, and should be replaced with java.rmi.server.UnicastRemoteObject.
Support for RMI in JDK1.02 was an interim release only, and should be avoided in production systems.
The availability of JDK1.1 or higher JVMs on most operating system platforms makes it a better choice for RMI.
Applications that use dynamic class loading, and thus install as their default security manager the RMISecurityManager, will not run without a few changes under the Java 2 platform.
Security precautions have been increased, and the security manager will restrict network access entirely, unless modified by a security policy file.
This means that RMI clients can't connect to RMI servers, and that RMI servers can't bind to a TCP port to accept incoming requests or to register with the rmiregistry.
There are several options available to developers under the Java 2 platform:
Remove the RMISecurityManager entirely, and disable dynamic class loading • Replace the RMISecurityManager with a custom security manager, which requires.
Specify a security policy file, which allows network access and (optionally) file access for.
Of the three options, the first is the simplest, but requires classpath access to class definitions.
In small systems, this might be fine, but the advantages of dynamic class loading in more complex systems make it an attractive feature to keep.
The second option requires much more work, and demands that you override the appropriate security manager methods to allow access to the network, file system, and other resources.
The best choice, if dynamic class loading is required, is to specify a security policy file when running a client or server.
Security policy files are simple text files that specify what access to resources is permitted.
Once a security manager such as RMISecurityManager is loaded, access to most resources is disabled.
To add a security manager, the following code can be added to the application (but must take place before any actions that could cause dynamic class loading to occur)
Basically, it excludes access to resources unless specific permission is given to grant access.
By specifying a security policy, you can override these settings and assign new permissions for networking security.
The idea of a policy file makes sense—it gives fine-grained control over security settings and forces system administrators and users to consider carefully what types of access are being given (as opposed to granting universal access and then excluding or restricting certain types of access)
It's easy to forget to exclude some feature, and forcing a system to specify only the permissions it needs will help to prevent a backdoor to the system being left open.
The format of the security policy file is specified in the Java 2 security documents, but for most RMI applications, a policy file like the following will suffice.
It grants permission to bind to a TCP port above 1024, but leaves privileged ports for well-known protocols (such as HTTP/FTP) unavailable, to prevent rogue code from masquerading as a legitimate server.
By convention, double slash characters ("\") are used as a path separator on Windows systems.
For other operating systems such as Unix, an alternate file separator will be used, such as "/."
To specify a security policy when running RMI software, the system policy java.security.policy is set; this points to the file location of the policy.
For example, to specify the rmi.policy file discussed earlier for an RMI client, the following command would be used:
Aside from issues of RMI support in Internet Explorer (discussed earlier), there is also the problem of applet network restrictions.
These restrictions can be very serious, and prevent RMI-based applets from communicating with RMI services.
Since an applet can't bind to a TCP port, it cannot be an RMI server.
While not every applet will need this functionality, it does mean that RMI services cannot be run from inside a Web browser.
This means that callbacks cannot be easily implemented using RMI—a client applet can invoke methods on a server, but cannot export a remote object and have it invoked during the callback by another service.
An applet can only connect to the host machine from which its codebase was loaded.
When an applet is loaded from a machine, such as www.davidreilly.com, for example, it can only make TCP and UDP connections to that server (see Figure 11-5)
This is a restriction placed on applets by browsers; while the restriction is in the best interest of users, it limits developers.
Applets are restricted in their ability to make network connections.
This means that applets don't make good RMI clients, unless of course the same machine is used for the rmiregistry, every service that the applet may need to use, and the Web server.
Digitally signed applets can lift this restriction, but this adds an extra level of complexity.
A considerable number of Web users are protected by a firewall, which usually prohibits direct socket connections.
Many companies, organizations, and other institutions use firewalls to protect themselves against security breaches from outside and to restrict the types of applications being run from the inside.
This means that some users will be able to use an applet that used RMI, and others will not.
Even a digitally signed applet won't get through, unless RMI requests are tunneled through the firewall using a trusted protocol such as HTTP.
Tunneling allows one protocol to be piggybacked on top of another more innocuous protocol, to overcome the limitations of firewalls and network security.
The RMI specification does support firewall tunneling using HTTP, and an example CGI script that supports this is available from the Sun Microsystems Java RMI page, http://java.sun.com/products/jdk/rmi/
However, the specification states that such tunneling is at least one order of magnitude slower than direct socket requests.
While RMI is an excellent technology for distributed computing, it is not normally feasible for Java applets.
A common technique used in event-driven programming is the callback.
The simplest way of understanding a callback is to think of a phone call.
Suppose you want to know if a stock price hits a certain level, and you ask your broker to call back when it does.
When the broker (the source of the event) notices that the stock price reflects your parameters, he or she calls you back, to notify you of the new price.
Of course, in an object-oriented system, we're talking about software components or entire systems, not people.
When one object needs to be notified of events as they occur (as opposed to continually polling to see if an event has happened), a callback is used.
This is often a more efficient way of implementing a system, as the object doesn't need to periodically check the state of another object—it is instead notified if an event is triggered.
Multiple listeners can register with the same event source, as shown in Figure 11-6
Multiple listeners can register with one or more event sources.
When an event is triggered (either as a result of an interaction with external objects or systems, or an internal process such as completing a work unit or interacting with a user), the event source will notify each and every registered listener (see Figure 11-7)
This means that the event source must maintain a list of active listeners, and then pass a message back to them that an event has occurred, and optionally give some details.
The next issue to understand about callbacks is how the notification is achieved.
Some systems are designed to send and receive messages, but how can one object pass information to another (and hence inform the object that an event has occurred)?
While you may not realize it, objects do this all the time, by invoking methods.
In object-oriented systems, callbacks are achieved by passing an object reference (the listener) to the object that is.
The event source, at the appropriate time, will then invoke one of the listener's methods to notify it of an action and allow it to respond, as illustrated in Figure 11-8
A listener interface is defined for each major event type, and interested objects then register implementations of that interface with the listener.
Callback implemented by invoking a method on a listening object.
This type of system is widely used in object-oriented programming, and in the context of Java, the Abstract Windowing Toolkit.
The AWT event-handling model requires application developers to implement a listener interface and have that listener register with each component that needs to be monitored.
Multiple listeners can register with the same component, and listeners can also register with multiple components (although due care must be taken to check which component was the source in this case)
When building a system, you can create your own listener interfaces, and add for each type of event relevant methods to register and deregister listeners.
While implementing callbacks in local objects is one thing, what about callbacks using RMI?
The chief difference between a local callback and a remote callback is that some extra initialization must occur, and that both the listener interface and the event source must be implemented as an RMI service.
For the listener to register itself with the remote event source, it must invoke a remote method and pass an object reference to.
This sounds complex in theory, but is reasonably straightforward in practice, requiring only a small amount of additional code.
This next example works through implementing a callback using RMI, and shows how a listener can be a client and a server.
For the purpose of this example, the server supplies information about changes in temperature, which can be accessed remotely.
However, it would be inefficient to check the monitor continually, polling for changes, as the time at which a change will occur is not known.
A temperature monitor registers with a temperature sensor service, and passes a reference to a remote temperature listener object.
When the temperature does change, a callback is made, notifying registered listeners.
The listener interface defines a remote object with a single method.
This method should be invoked by an event source whenever an event occurs, so as to act as notification that the event occurred.
The method signifies a change in temperature, and allows the new temperature to be passed as a parameter.
The event source must allow a listener to be registered and unregistered, and may optionally provide additional methods.
In this case, a method to request the temperature on demand is offered.
Once interfaces have been defined, the next step is to implement them.
A TemperatureSensorServer class is defined, which acts as an RMI server.
This server will also notify registered listeners as a client.
The server must extend UnicastRemoteObject, to offer a service, and implement the Temperature Sensor interface defined earlier.
After creating an instance of the service and registering it with the rmiregistry, the server launches a new thread, responsible for updating the value of the temperature, based on randomly generated numbers.
Both the amount (plus or minus 0.5 degrees) and the time delay between changes are generated randomly.
As each change occurs, registered listeners are notified, by reading from a list of listeners stored in a java.util.Vector object.
This list is modified by the remote addTemperatureListener(TemperatureListener) and removeTemperatureListener(Tempera tureListener) methods.
Get a number, to see if temp goes up or down.
Notify, if possible a listener try catch (RemoteException re) System.out.println ("removing listener -" + // Remove the listener.
Registration format //registry_hostname:port /service // Note the :port field is optional.
Register with service so that clients can // find us.
The temperature monitor client must implement the TemperatureListener interface, and register itself with the remote temperature sensor service, by invoking the TemperatureSensor.addTemperatureListener (Temperature Listener) method.
By registering as a listener, the monitor client will be notified of changes as they occur, using a remote callback.
The client waits patiently for any changes, and though it does not ever remove itself as a listener, functionality to achieve this is supplied by the TemperatureSensor.removeTemper atureListener(TemperatureListener) method.
Registration format //registry_hostname :port/service // Note the :port field is optional "/TemperatureSensor";
Lookup the service in the registry, and obtain // a remote service.
Create a new monitor and register it as a // listener with remote sensor catch (NotBoundException nbe) catch (RemoteException re) catch (Exception e)
When developing an RMI callback system, both parties (listener and event source) will act as servers and as clients.
This means that both parties need to have a copy of the class definitions, or access to a Web server if dynamic class loading is needed.
To use dynamic class loading, class files must be copied to a Web server, which must be specified as a command-line parameter (see Section 11.10.1), and a security manager must be installed by uncommenting the line //System.setSecurityManager ( new.
The following steps should be performed, in order, to run the example.
When first connected, the monitor will display the current temperature.
It registers itself with the server and is notified of changes by a callback.
Terminating the client will cause it to be unregistered in the TemperatureSensorServer, when the sensor is unable to notify the client.
In addition, the callback will be unregistered if the server is unable to notify the client due to a network error.
One of the chief disadvantages of using RMI for large and complex systems is the amount of overhead generated by RMI server software.
Suppose you are constructing a massive system, with many different RMI service interfaces and server implementations.
In such a system, each server would have to be running continually, even if it was seldom used by client software.
Servers must create and export remote objects that implement RMI service interfaces, which consumes memory and CPU time.
If each implementation is created as a separate server, this means that there will be as many JVM instances as there are services (unless all servers are combined into one, which is a messy solution and still wastes memory, as an instance of each service must still be created even if not used)
So a system with a dozen separate RMI servers would need at least a dozen JVMs, and possibly one more if the rmiregistry application is being used.
Of course, this is only a moderately sized distributed system—imagine large ones that run indefinitely but are infrequently used.
This translates into wasted CPU cycles and more memory than is needed (particularly if each service allocates memory for state information and loads many objects into memory)
Readers may find both the concept and the implementation of remote object activation to be quite complex.
Designing and implementing an activatable RMI service will not be appropriate in every circumstance—for example, if you have only a few services and they are running almost constantly, the performance gains from an activatable version may be small in comparison with the headaches involved.
Nonetheless, for large-scale systems, this is an important technology to be aware of, and extremely useful.
Remote object activation is a technique that solves the problem of running a large number of idle RMI services.
It allows services to be registered with the rmiregistry, but not instantiated.
Instead, they remain inactive, until called upon by a client, when they will awaken and perform their operation.
A special daemon process called the remote method invocation activation system daemon (rmid) listens for these requests and instantiates RMI services on demand.
Using some special trickery behind the scenes, a request is forwarded onto the activation daemon process, which creates the service.
Requests are then forwarded onto the newly created service, transparently to the client, just as if it were a normal RMI service that had been running indefinitely.
This means that services will lie dormant until invoked, and activated just in time (JIT) for use by a RMI client.
Remote object activation works a little differently from normal RMI servers.
To be locatable, a service must be available through an RMI registry, but to do that normally requires an object to be instantiated.
Since the whole point is to avoid instantiating RMI servers and instead to activate them as required, a faulting remote reference is registered in its place.
A faulting remote reference is a remote reference that acts as a proxy between the remote client and the as-yet-unactivated server.
Unlike a UnicastRemoteObject server, which runs indefinitely, a server installation program runs for a short duration.
Its purpose is to notify the activation system of an activatable remote object, and to register the faulting remote reference with the rmiregistry (see Figure 11-9)
Once the registration is complete, the server installation program can terminate; creating the remote object is now the responsibility of the faulting reference and the remote method activation system daemon.
Server installation program registers activatable object with rmid, and faulting reference with rmiregistry.
At some point in time in the future, an RMI client will look up the rmiregistry and select the service provided by the faulting remote reference.
When the faulting reference is activated, it checks to see if it already has a reference to the server.
The first time the faulting reference receives a call, the reference will be null, indicating that the server must be activated before being used.
It enlists the aid of the rmid application, to create a new instance of the server, and then.
Method requests to the faulting reference are forwarded onward to the activated object, and then returned back to the client.
Though there is a slight delay on wakeup, this is not repeated for subsequent requests, as the service is ready for action.
Faulting reference, with the aid of activation system, passes information from activated object back to client.
The elegance of this solution resides in the fact that the client is, at all times, completely unaware of the details of server implementation.
Although there may be some slight delay in creating the remote object initially, subsequent calls are faster, and the client does not know whether the server has always been running or was only recently activated.
This means no extra code to compile, and no extra work for client developers.
Creation of an activatable remote object is a little different from that of a UnicastRemoteObject, but the code is fairly similar.
Let's start with an extremely simple remote interface, and see how it would be implemented as an activatable remote object.
There's no difference between a normal remote interface and one that will be implemented by an activatable remote object.
In fact, an interface can be implemented by both an activatable object and a UnicastRemoteObject.
The next step is to create an implementation that extends the java.rmi.
It must implement our RMI interface and provide both a.
This constructor calls the parent constructor and exports the object on any available port.
Comparing this class to one extended from the UnicastRemoteObject class reveals relatively few differences.
However, there's a little more work to do, as the object must still be registered with the activation system and the rmiregistry.
Registering an activatable object with the RMI activation daemon is a more complex task than just creating one, and requires a fair bit of extra code.
This code can be included in a separate application class, or added in a main(..) method of the activatable remote object.
To demonstrate how this is achieved, we'll create an activatable version of the RMILightBulb service discussed earlier in the chapter, and create a main(..) method to register the object with the rmid and rmiregistry applications.
Step two : register that activation group descriptor //            with the activation system, and get //            groupID.
Register the group descriptor // without registering the group, no execution.
Step three: create an activation group, // passing the group ID and // descriptor as parameters ActivationGroup.createGroup(groupID,
Specify a location for the codebase of // the activated object.
However, if dynamic class loading is used, // a HTTP URL may be specified instead.
This may // be required on other operating systems that don't // support spaces and punctuation in filenames.
Step four : Create an activation descriptor, //             whose constructor requires the class //             name, codebase, and an optional //             marshalled object.
Step five : Register the object with the //             activation system //             Returns a stub, which may be registered //             with rmiregistry.
Remainder of code implements RMILightBulb interface, and is not RMI specific */ // Boolean flag to maintain light bulb state information.
Remotely accessible "on" method - turns on the light // Turn bulb on.
Remotely accessible "off" method - turns off the light // Turn bulb off.
Locally accessible "getBulb" method, returns state of bulb return lightOn;
Other than the main method, there really isn't a great deal of difference between the ActivatableLightBulbServer and the LightBulbServer class used earlier in the chapter.
The real source of complexity is in the registration of the object with the activation daemon in the main(..) method, as there is a fair amount of initialization that must take place before an object may be activated.
The first thing you should notice is that a security manager is installed by the application.
Activation requires some form of security manager to be installed, so this means that a security policy must be specified as a command-line parameter when running the server.
Also, registration code is wrapped in an exception handler, as errors could occur when contacting the rmid or rmiregistry applications.
The procedure for registering an activatable remote object can be broken down into a series of steps.
Each of these steps is difficult to understand initially, but varies very little from service to service.
When developing activatable services of your own, you can use these steps as guidelines for registering other classes.
The first step is to create an activation group descriptor.
This descriptor is associated with an activation group, and allows you to specify system properties.
In this example, no system properties are required and a new instance of the Properties class is created.
The second step is to register the activation group descriptor with the RMI activation daemon process.
Instead, a reference to the activation daemon process is obtained by.
Step two : register that activation group descriptor //            with the activation system, and get groupID.
Once a reference to the ActivationSystem class is obtained, the group descriptor is registered using the ActivationSystem.registerGroup method, which returns an ActivationGroupID instance.
Register the group descriptor - without registering the // group, no execution.
Once a group descriptor has been registered with the activation system and a valid ActivationGroupID obtained, the next step is to actually create the activation group.
The act of registering it is not sufficient—one must be created, by calling the static ActivationGroup.createGroup(ActivationGroupID id, ActivationGroupDesc descriptor) method.
This creates and assigns an activation group for the JVM, and notifies the activation system that the group is active.
Step three: create an activation group, passing the //             group ID and descriptor as parameters.
The fourth step is to create an activation descriptor, which describes an activatable remote object.
It stores three key pieces of information: the class name of the remote object, the URL location of the remote object, and (optionally) a MarshalledObject that contains a serialized version of the remote object.
Determining the codebase location of a remote object can be a little tricky.
However, if dynamic class loading is to be used by client and server, it may be more convenient to copy class files to a Web server and specify an HTTP URL instead.
Once a location has been determined, it is then passed to the ActivationDesc constructor.
This may not be required // on other operating systems that don't support spaces and // punctuation in filenames.
Step four : Create an activation descriptor, whose //             constructor requires the class name, //             codebase, and an optional marshalled object.
The fifth step is to register the activation descriptor with the activation system.
This instructs the activation system of the class name and the location of the class definition file.
A remote stub will be returned, which can then be registered as an RMI service.
Step five : Register the object with the activation system //             Returns a stub, which may be registered with //             rmiregistry.
The sixth and final step is to add a registry entry for the RMI service, so that clients may locate the service.
The code for this is similar to that of the previous RMI lightbulb server, except that a remote stub is registered, not an instance of a remote object.
Registration format //registry_hostname:port/service // Note the :port field is optional.
Before running the ActivatableLightBulbServer, you will need to compile it and produce stub/skeleton files.
Launch the rmiregistry and rmid applications (either in the same directory as the server, if classes are being loaded locally, or in a different directory if dynamic class loading is being used)
However, a security policy file must be specified for the server.
The security policy file must grant many additional privileges, beyond the standard socket and file permissions.
Since no actual objects are being passed (and hence no dynamic code is being loaded from the client), it is safe to grant access to all permissions; on a more complex and secure system, individual permissions could be assigned.
The format for the security policy is as follows (the policy should be saved as active.policy):
To specify the security policy file when running the server, use the following syntax:
Now, run the client application from earlier in the chapter against the server.
No code needs to be changed in the client—it will treat the activatable lightbulb server just as if it were a normal RMI server.
Remote method invocation (RMI) is a distributed systems technology that allows object methods located in remote Java Virtual Machines (JVMs) to be invoked remotely.
This is often a simpler way of communicating between one application and another than direct TCP socket communication, which requires both parties to adhere to a network protocol.
Instead of writing protocol implementations, developers interact with object methods defined by an RMI service interface.
Once a reference to a remote object has been obtained, it can be treated just like a local object, which is a more intuitive way of developing network applications.
At the conclusion of this chapter, readers should be able to design and implement systems in Java that make use of CORBA for communication.
Remote Method Invocation (RMI) was covered in Chapter 11, and as with many things in life, there is more than one way to achieve the same goal.
The Object Management Group (OMG), a large consortium of companies devoted to improving remote object method invocation, developed the CORBA specification.
Information on the work of the Object Management Group can be found at http://www.omg.org/
This makes it, for some purposes, a more attractive solution than RMI, which is limited primarily to the Java platform.
While not hardware or operating system specific, it is still fairly language specific unless you use a bridge from Java to another language, which requires considerable effort.
CORBA, on the other hand, is not limited to invoking objects running within a JVM.
It is not a language per se, but a specification for how objects will interact.
Thus, it is not limited to a single language—CORBA services and clients can be written in a variety of languages.
Suppose you wanted to write a business object that would fulfill requests for a range of machine types, and that would integrate with almost any major programming language such as C++ and Java.
That's the purpose behind the CORBA vision—to make objects accessible from any language and platform.
Older legacy systems can be integrated with Java software and revitalized (for example, adding on a Web interface to an old inventory management system)
The ability to interconnect with existing legacy systems isn't the only factor in CORBA's favor though.
Languages of the future that supercede Java will still be able to communicate with "legacy" systems that we are now writing and will write in the future.
While CORBA itself is not a language, it introduces a new language.
Such schemas are expressed using the Interface Definition Language (IDL)
Languages like Java that support CORBA can implement an IDL schema, thus allowing other software to invoke methods.
Currently, the following specifications for IDL language mappings are available from the OMG:
While this discussion covers CORBA only from a Java perspective, it is important for the reader to be aware that CORBA can be used from other languages.
This makes it more interoperable than Java's RMI, and ideal as a middle layer between Java and legacy systems.
A schema specification, written in IDL, describes the objects that are exported for remote usage.
An object request broker (ORB) implements the interface between remote object and software client.
The ORB handles requests for an object's services, as well as sending a response.
Figure 12-1 provides an overview of how clients and servants (the end implementation of the service) interact using an ORB.
Objects accessed locally act as a proxy for remote objects.
Even though objects are treated as local objects, and you can invoke methods on them as if they were normal objects, there's an extra step involved.
Acting as an intermediary between client and servant is the ORB.
Communication between client and servant occurs over the network via the Internet Inter-ORB Protocol (IIOP), shown in Figure 12-2
Nonetheless, it's remember that software using IIOP as a transport mechanism will have all the strengths and weaknesses of TCP/IP.
Your CORBA software will be limited by network restrictions on applets, as well as firewalls.
Generally, however, CORBA services are used within an intranet, as the extra overhead of transmission over the Internet is slower, and users may have a firewall in between.
In addition to object method invocation, the CORBA standard defines a host of other features, such as transaction handling, messaging, and object persistence.
Such topics, however, are beyond the scope of this book, and are worthy of book-length discussions in their own right.
Within the CORBA architecture, software services are described by a schema and implemented by a servant.
The servant is a special piece of software that registers itself with a lookup service, so that other CORBA software can locate and access its services.
Typically a CORBA server will create a CORBA servant, and is then responsible for creating an ORB for the servant and registering the service for access by other clients.
Clients, on the other hand, don't need to register with a name service.
They do, however, want to use the name service to look up services (as shown in Figure 12-4)
This is, in fact, very similar to what occurs with RMI.
Such a system is much more fault tolerant and versatile than relying on hard-coded locations in your source code or configuration files, and allows network administrators to distribute services across the network for the purposes of load balancing.
The Interface Definition Language (IDL) is a crucial language to learn and attain, as all CORBA services are described by it.
If you've managed to acquire a reasonably difficult language like Java, then picking up IDL will be a breeze.
The IDL defines many language constructs, allowing a rich schema of objects to be described.
We'll cover each of the basic ones, but readers are advised to read the "Java Language Mapping to OMG IDL Specification," published by the Object Management Group.
The IDL documentation is available from the OMG Web site, at http://www.omg.org/technology/documents/formal/java_language_mapping_to_omg_idl.htm.
If the page has moved from this location, you can access it from the main OMG site at http://www.omg.org/, by searching for "Java Language Mapping to OMG IDL."
Readers interested in the more complex constructs are advised to consult the "Java Language Mapping to OMG IDL Specification" document, on which Table 12-1, showing the basic IDL datatypes, is based.
Interface definitions describe a remote object, the methods that the object exposes, as well as member variables, such as constants.
Modules are a convenient way of grouping logically related interfaces together for convenience.
Consider modules similar to a package in Java; related classes are grouped together into categories.
Java Datatypes and Their Mapping to IDL Datatypes Java Datatype  IDL Datatype Void  void Boolean  boolean Char  wchar Byte  octet Short  short Int  long Long  long long Float  float Double  double java.lang.String  string / wstring module AccountTypes interface UserAccount // code for account would go here interface UserID // code for userid would go here interface Subscriptions // code for subscriptions would go here.
Interfaces can have variables, as well as providing member variables.
While you can write accessor functions to obtain the value of a variable and/or modify it, an easier alternative is to define an attribute.
Attributes may be mutable or immutable to the remote client through the readonly keyword.
Remember, however, that if you make an attribute mutable instead of hiding it through a set of accessor functions, you lose control over how modifications are made.
The following is an example of an attribute, in contrast to our first interface example, which defined accessor functions:
While attributes have their uses, the most important part of an IDL schema will be the operations that are defined.
These operations may be invoked remotely, and can perform both simple and complex tasks, limited only by the imagination.
Operations are functions that can return a value upon completion and can accept parameters.
There are three types of parameters that may be specified for an IDL operation:
A cleaner implementation will result when you use input parameters only, and a single return value.
However, sometimes it may be necessary to use the other modifiers; readers are advised to use discretion.
The following interface shows three simple operations, two of which accept an input parameter.
Each operation also specified a return value (in this case, of type float)
Note that if a method does not have a return value, just as in Java you should specify this by using the void keyword.
Exception handling in CORBA is a good way to indicate abnormal situations.
Rather than returning a simple error code as a return value, you can throw an exception.
Exception handling in CORBA varies slightly from that of Java, in that exceptions may not be subclasses.
For example, java.net.Socket Exception may be thrown when using the Socket class, but actually a subclass is being thrown (such as java.net.ConnectException or java.net.NoRouteToHostException)
You can, however, define several exceptions within an IDL schema, and have an operation throw more than one type of exception.
The following is an example of two IDL exceptions thrown by an operation.
The raises keyword is used to identify a method that throws an exception.
So far, we've covered the basic syntax of the Interface Definition Language.
The next step is to write a CORBA service described by an IDL schema and implemented in Java.
We'll also need to write a CORBA client that will access our service.
So you can compare between CORBA and RMI, we'll carry on the example of a distributed lightbulb service, first introduced in Chapter 11
For efficiency's sake, we will use the CORBA reference implementation that is included in the Java 2 platform.
While this is not a full production implementation, it is perfectly adequate for the purposes of learning CORBA, and it comes free as part of Java.
The following schema describes our distributed lightbulb service, which will be saved as a text file called LightBulb.idl.
The next step involves mapping this IDL schema to Java.
Rather than manually converting an IDL schema to Java source code, we'll use a simple tool to automate the process.
If you've already saved the lightbulb schema as LightBulb.idl (preferably in a directory of its own), the next step is to generate the Java mapping, using idlj.exe.
If you do a directory listing, you'll notice that there are quite a few new files.
These are stub and skeleton files, created automatically as part of the mapping process.
You should not modify these files directly; if you run the idlj program in the future your changes will be overwritten.
Instead, we'll use these classes as the scaffolding for a CORBA servant and a CORBA client.
Writing code to implement a CORBA service is fairly straightforward.
Most of the hard work has already been done, remember, by the IDL mapping tool.
When you define an interface, you'll get a variety of files.
The two most important ones for writing a servant are the following:
So, when we compiled the LightBulb schema, it produced (among other files), LightBulbOperations.java and _LightBulbImplBase.java.
The Operations source file provides the Java mapping of operations a CORBA servant must implement.
You can copy and paste these method signatures into your servant, and then provide an implementation.
The second file, ImplBase, should be extended using class inheritance by your servant, and should then implement the methods of the Operations file.
The following example shows an implementation of a CORBA servant, for our distributed lightbulb service.
Implementing operations defined by the LightBulb // interface // Remember, the Operations class of any interface contains // the Java method signatures you must implement.
Turn on the bulb // Check to see if bulb already on if (bulbOn) return;
Make it a one in four chance, since it is an // old bulb and we want to test the throwing of // an exception.
Check to see if broken if ( !bulbOk ) // Return bulb state return bulbOn;
Next step : export the orb to our name service.
Narrow to a NamingContext object // Creating a naming component for our servant.
Wait indefinitely for clients to use the // servant for (;;) catch (Exception e)
The code for these is fairly simple, and consists of modifying boolean flags that control whether the light is on, off, or broken.
What is important to understand from this example is how to export a CORBA servant and list it in the CORBA naming service.
You could, if you wanted a clean separation between application and network code, create a separate class to handle the CORBA-specific code.
However, it is often easier to combine the two, by adding a main(String[]) method to your servant, to allow it to be run as a stand-alone application.
The first step is to obtain a reference to the object request broker and register the servant with it.
You don't create an ORB, as there is only one ORB per JVM instance.
Instead, you obtain a reference to it by calling the ORB.init(..) method.
The second step for writing a servant is to register it with a name service.
The name service allows the servant to be located by clients.
This part gets a little tricky, and involves a few extra lines of code.
The first part of the procedure is to obtain a reference to the name service.
We do this by asking our ORB to locate the NameService, and we then narrow the service from a generic CORBA object to a NamingContext object, which represents the NameService.
This is, effectively, a cast from a generic type to a more specific one.
The next step is to create a descriptor for our servant, using the Name Component class.
This descriptor will then be passed to the NamingContext object.
It accepts an array of descriptors, not individual ones, so we'll wrap it in a single element array.
Finally, we notify the naming service by calling the rebind(..) method of NamingContext.
Now our server will wait patiently for incoming client requests.
The next step, of course, is to write the client!
The code required for a CORBA client differs only slightly from that of a server, in that instead of locating and registering a servant with a name service, the client instead looks up a servant.
Both client and server still need to initialize an object request broker and locate the name service, so much of the code is identical.
Let's look at the source code of the CORBA lightbulb client.
Second step: lookup the light bulb using name // service // We use the same code from our servant to create // the nameservice reference and namecomponent.
Creating a naming component for our light bulb // servant.
We want to // resolve (look up) the name component //  representing the light bulb.
Finally, we have a remote reference to our // light bulb.
Turn bulb on and off till it fails, // demonstrating exceptions for (;;) try catch (BulbBrokenException bbe) System.err.println ("Bulb broken exception break; catch (Exception e)
To conserve space and avoid repetition, we'll use the same code as in Light BulbServant to initialize the object request broker, and to locate the name service that will provide a remote reference to the CORBA servant.
The code required for a CORBA client to perform this operation is no different from that of a CORBA servant.
Once the client has obtained a reference to the NameService, it will ask for a servant matching a specified NamingComponent.
The code, to prepare the component, is identical to that of the servant and should match, otherwise the servant will not be locatable.
Where the client differs from the servant is that it obtains a remote reference, by asking the name service to locate a matching service.
We want to resolve (look up) // the name component representing the light bulb.
The service, if able to find a match, will return a reference, which is initially a generic CORBA object and not a more specific object instance.
It must therefore be narrowed to a specific LightBulb instance through the use of a "helper" class, created by the idlj compiler.
We as programmers do not need to concern ourselves with how the helper class works—it is instead.
The helper class is custom written by the compiler to create a mapping from each element of the IDL schema to the appropriate Java code and therefore must not be tampered with by the developer.
Once you have an instance of the servant, it will act just like a local object.
It is, in fact, acting as a proxy, carrying the remote request to the servant and returning the response.
In this way, a CORBA service differs little from that of one written using remote method invocation—both are just as easy to use once a reference is obtained.
The remainder of the client code deals with the matter of turning on and off the lightbulb.
To demonstrate exception handling, our bulb will expire after a random number of switches on and off, so a repeated call to turn it on and off will eventually generate a BulbBrokenException, as defined in our CORBA schema.
The client loops indefinitely, waiting for the bulb to break, and then catches the thrown exception.
It should be noted, too, that other exceptions may be thrown at runtime, such as if a CORBA nameservice or a remote Light Bulb servant cannot be located.
With the servant and client complete, the final process is to run both software applications to demonstrate remote communication between objects using CORBA.
Compile the client and the server code, as well as any other associated files generated by the idjl.exe application.
By placing all of your source files in the same directory, you can use a single command to perform this operation:
Included as part of the Java 2 Standard Edition, the application tnameserv.exe will be used as our name service.
You'll want to run this in a separate console window, as the program runs continually.
If you get an exception reading org.omg.CORBA.COMM_FAILURE, it means CORBA couldn't find the name server.
Your client will attempt to look up the appropriate lightbulb service from the CORBA name service application.
Your console should display the message "Looking for lightbulb" followed by "Found lightbulb," unless either the name service or server is not yet running.
Now your client will enter a loop turning the bulb on and off until it breaks, thus demonstrating exception handling under CORBA.
Congratulations, you have now run your first CORBA client-server application!
While many developers prefer the technique of remote method invocation (RMI) covered in the previous chapter, CORBA does have its advantages as well.
Chiefly, it is supported by a wide range of languages, and supports additional features such as transaction handling, messaging, and persistence.
However, such topics are of less importance to most Java developers, and most will be concerned about language independence and the long-term interoperability of their Java software with legacy and future systems.
The pros and cons of CORBA over RMI have been outlined in this chapter, and only you as a developer can decide which technology is the most appropriate, on a case-by-case (or project-by-project) basis.
JavaMail The ability to send messages electronically across the Internet has changed the face of communication.
E-mail, and to a lesser extent other forms of messaging such as newsgroups, have become an essential part of modern life.
Recognizing the need to support such communication within Java, Sun Microsystems released the JavaMail API.
The JavaMail API provides a common framework for managing electronic mail, by defining a set of abstract classes that represent the components of a mail system.
The JavaMail API provides access to electronic mail systems, as well as the ability to create and transmit new mail messages.
It has been designed to make it easy for developers to incorporate mail functionality into software, and to be interoperable with current and future mail/ messaging services.
Rather than prescribing a particular set of protocols and supplying an implementation for these, the JavaMail API leaves the choice of implementation open to service providers.
Though the API ships with minimal implementations for SMTP, IMAP, and POP as of JavaMail 1.2, these alone are not sufficient for every program or situation, due to the wide variety of mail and messaging protocols used today on the Internet.
The API allows third-party developers to plug in their own providers and support other protocols.
For example, implementations are already available for the popular POP3 and NNTP message stores.
This makes JavaMail far more powerful than just an implementation of a few mail protocols—JavaMail is a flexible framework providing a common interface to mail systems, regardless of the details of their implementation.
The JavaMail API is targeted toward several types of audiences, as identified in the JavaMail API specification:
Developers writing mail applications (such as an e-mail client or a newsreader) • Developers whose applications must be "mail-aware" or able to use mail as a transport.
The first two audiences rely on implementations supplied by messaging service providers.
The API designers have chosen a layered approach, separating the implementation details from the API interface.
When an application must access a mail service or send a message to a mail service, it uses the JavaMail API to request an implementation.
The API returns an instance of that implementation (if one is available), and the application can then use it to retrieve or send mail.
The actual details of the implementation are transparent to the application developer.
While the application can request an implementation of a particular protocol, the interface to a mail service remains the same.
A list of these can be found at the JavaMail API Web site, at http://java.sun.com/products/javamail/
The JavaMail API is not part of the standard Java API, and must be installed before it can be used.
Before you can use JavaMail, you must install it, along with the JavaBeans Activation Framework (JAF), which is a package required by JavaMail to determine the datatype of mail messages (for example, to determine the MIME type of a message body or attachment)
When applications are deployed to third parties, the latter will also require installation of JavaMail and JAF.
The code and instructions in this chapter apply to JavaMail 1.1.3
Readers who prefer to use later versions of JavaMail should consult the installation instructions for any changes, and should be mindful that any additions to the API may not be backward compatible with older JavaMail installations.
Then you'll need to unzip the archives in which they are stored and add JavaMail and JAF to your classpath.
On a Windows machine, add the following to your autoexec.bat file (substituting for your installation directory):
Once this is complete, JavaMail has been installed, and you're ready to start writing applications or to run existing ones.
If you're eager to see its capabilities, check out the demonstration applications in the javamail\demo directory, or read on.
JavaMail ships with a small number of protocol providers (code plug-ins for the JavaMail API that implement specific Internet protocols)
Third-party implementations are also available, and a separate download from Sun Microsystems is offered for POP3 support.
Our first example lists the available mail protocol implementations and their properties.
The ProviderList application requires no parameters, and is simple to run:
When run, it will display the name of each protocol, the type of protocol, and the vendor name.
If you've installed JavaMail and the POP3 provider, you should see output similar to the following:
JavaMail provides a set of interfaces to mail protocol implementations.
Once you've mastered the basic concepts and interfaces, you'll be able to write applications that work with any protocol for which an implementation is available.
Below are some of the important classes that form the core of the JavaMail API, as well as the methods offered by these classes.
The JavaMail API is extensive, and a first review of it can be overwhelming.
Readers should not be concerned with the details of every method; a preliminary examination will provide a sufficient idea of how they work.
The Address class represents an Internet messaging address, as distinct from another type of Internet address such as the Uniform Resource Locator (java.
This is an abstract class; it may not be instantiated.
Instead, developers create a subclass of this class, or use one of two subclasses provided with the JavaMail API: the InternetAddress and NewsAddress classes.
The Message class is an abstract class that represents a mail message.
It is responsible for storing the contents of a mail message and any associated properties (such as the subject, date, and "To" and "From" addresses)
Messages may be sent using a message transport object, or retrieved from a mail folder.
This is also an abstract class; it may not be instantiated.
The following methods of the Message class are public unless otherwise noted.
MessagingException— adds the specified mail addresses to the "From" field of the.
If the message is read only, or does not allow modification, an exception will be thrown.
There are three types of recipients (to, carbon copy, and blind carbon copy) that may be specified, either as Message.RecipientType.TO, Message.RecipientType.CC, or Message.RecipientType.BCC.
MessagingException— modified form of the addRecipient method that allows multiple addresses to be added by specifying an array of Address objects.
A null value may be returned if no sender could be identified.
Date getReceivedDate throws javax.mail.MessagingException— returns the date when the message was retrieved, if available.
This field indicates that messages should be directed to a different address than the sender.
MessagingException— checks to see whether a particular flag is set for this message.
Message reply (boolean all) throws javax.mail.Messaging Exception— returns a new message, with the appropriate header fields set to deliver the message to the sender of the message.
If the specified boolean flag is set to "true," all recipients of the message will be sent the reply.
For example, if a flag was modified, this method would update the message's flag settings.
IllegalStateException, javax.mail.IllegalWriteException, javax.mail.MessagingException— modifies the specified flag to the specified state, for the message.
MessagingException— sets the value of the "From" field to the specified address.
IllegalStateException, javax.mail.MessagingException— sets multiple recipients of the specified type for the message, overwriting all previous values for that type.
In addition, the Message class implements the javax.mail.Part interface, which provides a set of methods for modifying the contents of a message.
You'll learn how to specify the contents of a mail message in an example later in the chapter.
The Service class is an abstract class, representing a messaging-related networking service.
It may not be instantiated by application developers, and usually is not extended directly, as there are already subclasses to represent mail stores and transports.
The following methods of the Service class are public unless otherwise noted.
IllegalStateException, javax.mail.MessagingException— attempts a connection to the network service represented by the mail store object, using the specified connection details.
If a connection could not be established, or was already established, an exception will be thrown.
This method takes an extra argument, allowing a mail port to be specified.
If a connection could not be established, or was already established, an exception will be thrown.
This method should not normally be overridden, and if it is, should be called from any subclasses.
String password) throws javax.mail.MessagingException— is overridden by service implementations to provide protocol-specific connection routines.
A mail store represents an external Internet mail service (such as a news server or mail server)
Like Message, Store is an abstract class, whose implementation is supplied by mail service providers—it is not instantiated by applications.
A Store provides access to individual folders (collections of messages), through which messages may then be read.
In some simple systems there will only be a single folder available, the INBOX, and in others a wider variety of folders will be provided.
It is extended from the javax.mail.Service class, which provides methods to name a service and to have it connect to the network service it represents.
The Store class also provides methods to register and deregister event listeners (discussed later in the chapter)
All methods of the Store class are public unless otherwise noted.
Folder getFolder (String name) throws java.lang.IllegalState Exception javax.mail.MessagingException— returns a folder for the specified name, if available.
Folder getFolder (URLName name) throws java.lang.IllegalState Exeption, javax.mail.MessagingException— returns a folder for the specified URL.
Note that the URLName is a new class introduced as part of the javax.mail class, and differs only from a URL object in that it does not support methods to open a connection to the resource.
A folder represents a collection of messages, such as a mailbox or a newsgroup.
Individual messages can be selected from a folder, searched, and deleted.
Messages stored in a folder also have an additional property—a set of flags that indicate whether the message has been read, should be deleted, and so on.
Folders are accessed through a mail store—each folder is named, and the name associated with the default folder is INBOX.
The following member variables are publicly declared, and are used for identifier folder access permissions.
Folder.READ_ONLY— indicates that a folder may be read but not modified.
Folder.READ_WRITE— indicates that a folder may be both read and modified.
However, this should not be used to send new messages.
If the messages are not part of the current folder, or the current folder is not open, an exception will be thrown.
Returns "true" if folder was created successfully, "false" if not.
A folder must be opened, and exist on the server, or an exception will be thrown.
Once messages are expunged, they are gone, and new message numbers will be assigned.
Folder getFolder(String name) throws javax.mail.MessagingException— returns a folder object associated with the specified pathname.
If an absolute path is not specified, the folder name will be interpreted as a subfolder of the current folder.
If an invalid number is specified, the folder is closed or does not exist, or a network error occurs, an exception will be thrown.
If no messages exist, a blank array will be returned.
IllegalStateException javax.mail.FolderNotFoundException javax.mail.MessagingException— returns an array composed of the specified messages.
A new message is a message whose "recent" flag is set to true.
Some store providers may not support this functionality, in which case a value of –1 is returned.
For example, on Wintel systems the file separator is "\," whereas on Unix systems the separator is "/." Mail systems can also have different separators, and this information is often needed at runtime to compose pathnames.
If the store provider doesn't support this functionality, a value of –1 will be returned.
Exception, javax.mail.MessagingException— returns a list of subscribed folders beneath the current folder.
FolderNotFoundException, javax.mail.MessagingException— returns a list of subscribed folders beneath the current folder, matching the specified pattern.
For example, "*java*" might return the newsgroups "comp.lang.java.help" and "comp.lang.java.programmer."
Not every folder may be renamed; the success of the operation is returned as a boolean value.
Only the messages specified as a parameter will be searched for a match.
IllegalStateException, javax.mail.MessagingException— modifies the flag settings of the specified message numbers to the specified value.
IllegalStateException, javax.mail.MessagingException— modifies the flag settings of the specified messages (which must be part of this folder), to the specified value.
For example, a newsgroup may be subscribed to, and method.
A Transport represents an Internet mail service that allows messages to be sent (as opposed to a store, which is designed for retrieving messages)
Transport is an abstract class, and may not be instantiated by applications.
Static methods are provided, which use the default transport system for each type of recipient address (for example, a newsgroup address type gets sent to a newsgroup, while a mail address gets sent to a mail account)
The following methods of the Transport class are public unless otherwise noted.
If a message could not be sent to one or more recipients, a SendFailedException will be thrown, and valid recipients may not receive the message.
An easier alternative is to specify the recipients of a message during its construction.
Unlike the Transport.send(..) method, valid recipients are guaranteed to receive the message if there are some invalid recipients and a SendFailedException is thrown.
The Session class represents the interface between a mail client and a mail server.
This class acts as a factory for Store and Transport objects.
Using a Session instance, an application can request a particular type of store or transport, and if an implementation for that protocol is available, it will be returned.
As each session can contain sensitive information (such as usernames and passwords), granting access to the default session may be risky if multiple applications are running within the JVM.
In most situations, however, it is safe to pass a null value for the authenticator parameter.
Mail session properties may also be specified, to control the actions of the session object.
Folder getFolder(URLName location) throws javax.mail.NoSuch ProviderException, javax.mail.MessagingException— returns a folder object for the specified URLName.
If a folder could not be found, a null value will be returned, and an exception may be thrown.
PasswordAuthentication getPasswordAuthentication (URLName location)— returns a PasswordAuthentication object for the session.
String getProperty(String key)— returns the value of the specified mail.
Store getStore(Provider provider) throws javax.mail.NoSuch ProviderException— returns the mail store offered by the specified implementation provider, if one is available.
Store getStore(String name) throws javax.mail.NoSuchProviderException— returns the mail store representing the specified protocol, if one is available.
Store getStore(URLName location) throws javax.mail.NoSuch ProviderException— returns the mail store associated with the specified URLName object, if one is available.
Exception— returns the default mail transport, determined by the mail.store.transport property setting, if one is available.
NoSuchProviderException— returns the mail transport associated with the specified address's type, if one is available.
NoSuchProviderException— returns the mail transport offered by the specified provider, if one is available.
NoSuchProviderException— returns the mail transport for the specified transport protocol, if one is available.
NoSuchProviderException— returns the mail transport associated with the specified URLName object, if one is available.
PasswordAuthentication requestPasswordAuthentication(Inet Address address, int port, String protocol, String prompt, String username)— prompts the user for a password and returns a PasswordAuthentication object when called.
This method is invoked when password details have not been provided.
This information is irrelevant to users, but can be helpful during debugging.
A null value may also be specified, removing any password authentication.
Armed with a basic knowledge of the essential classes in the JavaMail API, we will now take a look at a practical application.
Sending messages with the JavaMail API is extremely simple, and a good demonstration of the capabilities of the API.
A default implementation of the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) is available, which is used to send e-mail messages to SMTP mail servers.
We'll use this implementation to send an electronic message using SMTP and JavaMail.
Check for valid number of parameters System.out.println ("java SendMailDemo smtphost return;
Create a message to send, specifying our // session message.setContent ("This is a test message....",
The first thing our application must do is to import the necessary classes from the JavaMail.
The application then checks for the correct number of command-line parameters.
To send even the simplest of mail messages, we need to know several pieces of information—including the hostname of the SMTP server, the recipient of the message, and other message details such as the subject and body of the message.
Our mail application is fairly simple, and we can provide a default subject and body for the purposes of a demonstration.
The application must, however, be informed of the recipient of the message (your e-mail address) and the SMTP server name.
Check for valid number of parameters System.out.println ("java SendMailDemo smtphost to_ return; // .....
We start by creating a new Properties object, and specifying the mail transport protocol we wish to use, as well as the hostname of the SMTP server.
If you'd like to see what is going on behind the scenes, or need further information for debugging purposes, simply set the mail.debug property to a String value of "true." In this example, you could add the following line here:
We pass this information on to JavaMail, when we request an instance of the Session class, by and an Authenticator object (which can be set to null)
Once you have a Session object, you can then begin to create a mail message.
Remember that the Message class is an abstract class, so we need to use a concrete implementation.
We create a new instance of a MimeMessage (which is used to handle a variety of message types, including plain text), and pass to its constructor our Session object (needed later when we want to transmit the messsage)
Then we can begin to populate our message with data, such as the subject and message contents.
We can't specify a "To:" or "From:" address simply by passing a String.
For news messages, we would pass a NewsAddress instance, but for mail messages we pass an InternetAddress instance.
You'll notice too that for the "From:" address, two parameters are used.
An InternetAddress can take a raw e-mail address, or an e-mail address and a personal name.
In this case, we use "nobody@nowhere.com" as the e-mail address, and "SendMailDemo" as the person.
There are also different types of recipient addresses (TO, CC, and BCC)
A TO address is sent to the named recipient, while a CC address is sent as a carbon copy.
A BCC address is sent as a blind carbon copy; that is, other recipients of the message won't know that it was sent to the address listed as BCC.
The address types are represented by constants defined in Message.RecipientType:
Simply call the static method Transport.send( Message ), and the message will be sent.
Transport knows the correct mail settings, because our message knows the correct Session instance, which was created earlier.
If you want finer control over message sending, you can request a Transport instance and open connections yourself.
For a single message, however, this is the easiest way of delivery.
We also need to wrap most of this code in exception handlers, as there are plenty of errors that can occur at runtime.
For example, the address specified by the user might not be an actual address (if the user mixed up the order of parameters)
The SMTP server might be incorrect, or might be down.
These are a few of the many errors that can occur at runtime.
For this reason, applications must at least catch a MessagingException.
You'll need to specify the hostname for an SMTP server on your local network, or the SMTP server of your Internet service provider.
You'll also need to specify your e-mail address, so that you can check whether the message was delivered correctly.
While sending messages is useful, it is only part of the functionality of the JavaMail API.
Reading messages from an Internet mail server (such as an IMAP/POP3 account or a newsgroup), is also possible, as the next example demonstrates.
Request the INBOX folder for this mail store System.err.println ("No default folder return;
As in the previous example, it is necessary here to import the basic JavaMail packages.
We won't be specifying any properties, however, and the import statement for java.util.Properties can be omitted.
The next thing that must be done is to check command-line parameters.
There are four parameters to this example, which control the protocol used (either IMAP or POP3), the hostname of the mail service, the username, and finally the password.
If there are missing or extra parameters, a message showing the correct syntax will be displayed.
Check for valid number of parameters System.out.println ("java ReadMailDemo protocol host username return;
Next, we need to get an instance of the Session class, by using the static method a Properties object.
We could create a new Properties instance that is blank, but it is better to select the default system properties, as any existing property settings will be preserved.
Since the user of the application will specify a protocol as a command-line parameter, we don't need to choose the protocol ourselves.
Before using a mail store, though, it is important that it is actually connected.
Some mail systems may have many folders, whereas others may support just one folder.
Generally, the INBOX folder will be the default folder for incoming messages.
The application requests the INBOX folder, and opens it in READ_ONLY mode.
Before a folder can be used, it must be opened.
The folder, now open, can be used to retrieve messages.
First, the application requests a count of the total number of messages available.
Next, it uses this information to select a batch of messages, from the first message to the last.
Arrays in Java are zero-indexed, meaning that the first element is element 0
The application then traverses through each element of the array (starting with the first message, at element 0)
The application displays the sender of the message as well as the message subject.
The JavaMail API allows for multiple senders, so if the mailing system your application is using supports this facility, then for completeness you may want to have your applications check the length of the "From" array.
Finally, we can clean up open folders and connections to mail services by calling the close method indicating whether any messages marked "deleted" should be removed.
As we're opening the folder in read-only mode anyway, this is unnecessary, so a value of "false" is passed.
These are the name of the mail protocol to use, the hostname of the mail service, the username of the account, and finally the password.
If you have an IMAP account, use the protocol name of "imap," and for a POP3
Simple tasks are easy to perform in JavaMail, but more advanced functionality is available.
Let's take a further look at what JavaMail has to offer.
The JavaMail API uses the JDK1.1 event-handling model, which readers may already be familiar with from using the Abstract Windowing Toolkit (AWT) and Swing.
For those without prior experience with this model, a brief over view is offered.
Readers acquainted with this material may choose to skip to Section 13.5.1.2
As of JDK1.1, this model has been replaced with a far superior mechanism.
The new event-handling model requires objects that are interested in observing events to register with the event source as a listener (see Figure 13-2)
Each type of listener defines a set of methods that define event handlers.
When an event is generated by the event source, one of these handler methods will be called, for every registered listener.
This model allows multiple listeners for a given event source, as well as multiple types of event listeners.
Other listeners will be notified independently of each other; one listener cannot block the notification of another.
Let's look at a brief example of this event-handling mechanism in action.
For example, suppose an application wanted to terminate when a button was pressed.
Rather than subclassing the button to provide event methods, the application can implement the appropriate listener interface and register with the button.
In this example, which uses ActionListener, only one event callback method was required.
If you only want to implement one or a few of the methods of an event listener, there is usually a listener adapter class provided.
An adapter class implements every method you need for a listener interface, and by overriding individual methods you can save yourself a considerable amount of time and effort.
Inner classes are another way of working with short event handlers.
If you frequently write event listeners that use adapters, you'll find that you often need to create new Java source files, which can become difficult to manage.
Inner classes are a language feature of JDK1.1 and higher.
A thorough discussion of Java language features is beyond the scope of this book.
However, examples using inner classes for event handling can be found later in the chapter.
The event classname, its corresponding description, and the usual sources of the event are shown in Table 13-1
Each event can be responded to by implementing the appropriate event listener classes.
There are six listener classes, and some support adapters that are useful when a single event action, or a few event actions, must be monitored.
Let's look at a practical example of JavaMail event handlers.
Earlier in this chapter, we looked at how to send a simple message using the Transport class.
However, other than catching exceptions thrown at runtime, there wasn't any strong error-handling code.
For example, the message might not have been delivered if the SMTP server rejected the recipient or IP address of the sender.
The earlier example has been rewritten to illustrate the JavaMail event-handling mechanism.
It registers a ConnectionListener and a TransportListener, to detect connection and transport events.
While some of the code is the same, changed portions are described below.
Check for valid number of parameters System.out.println ("java SendEventMailDemo smtphost return;
Create a message to send, specifying our session message.setContent ("This is a test message....",
Create an anonymous inner class for connection listener transport.addConnectionListener( new opened(ConnectionEvent e) System.out.println System.out.println ("connection.
Close the connection catch (AddressException   ae) catch (MessagingException me) catch (Exception ex)
The first major difference is that we need to get an instance of a Transport object.
While Transport has a static method that allows messages to be sent, you will need an instance of Transport to register a ConnectionListener or TransportListener.
Next, we have to create a listener and register it with our transport object.
In this example, anonymous inner classes are used, though it is also possible to create separate classes for this purpose.
An application could implement a Listener interface, or extend an Adapter class if not every listener method was required.
When the listeners are registered, you can then work with the Trans port object.
The first step This will trigger the registered ConnectionListener, as a connection will be established.
Instead, the This will trigger a TransportEvent, which will be passed to the registered listener.
When closed, a Connection Event will be passed to our listener.
As in the earlier SendMailDemo, the hostname of an SMTP server must be specified as a parameter, as well as a valid e-mail address.
Not only will a message be sent, but you'll also see the application progress, when a connection opens and closes and when a message is delivered to the SMTP server.
Previous examples in this chapter have dealt with purely text documents.
However, one of the most useful features of e-mail is the ability to send files as an attachment.
E-mail makes it easy to get files across to other people on the Internet, such as documents and compressed files archives.
JavaMail supports MIME attachments, and makes it easy to compose and transmit a multipart message with a file attachment.
This next example is based on a demonstration provided in the JavaMail SDK.
Construct a multipart message // Create the message body msgBody.setText ("There is a file attached to this.
Set the filename of the file (don't include path info) (file.lastIndexOf( File.separator)+1, else.
Sending a plain text message is relatively straightforward—simply create a new instance of a method.
When a multipart message (one composed of multiple parts) is needed, further work needs to be done.
The first step will be to create a new Multipart object.
The Multipart object acts as a container for the various components that will make up our message.
This is where the normal text of the message goes.
Next, we need to create a second BodyPart, to hold our attachment.
We will also need to specify a data source for the part's contents, using a FileDataSource object from the JavaBeans Activation Framework (JAF)
We must also specify a DataHandler, which will use our FileDataSource to get the contents of a file.
Set the appropriate data handler attachment.setDataHandler ( new DataHandler ( fileDataSource )
We also need to assign a name to the file that will be stored as an attachment.
If an absolute filename (a filename that includes path information) is specified as a command-line parameter, we need to strip this information away using some simple string processing.
Set the filename of the file (don't include path info) else.
Finally, we add each individual part to our Multipart object, and assign this object as the content of our message.
This message will send the specified file as an e-mail attachment.
Your mail client must support attachments in order for the file to be read.
The JavaMail API is a comprehensive framework for sending and retrieving mail messages.
Creating your own implementation of a mail protocol is feasible, but involves additional effort and replication of code.
The JavaMail API has many benefits as well, including an interface that makes the choice of mail protocol transparent during coding.
Whether using IMAP or POP3, the code to access mail folders remains the same, and future mail protocols can be included with little or no changes.
The firewall draws a line in the sand, insulating internal computers from the Internet.
Exceptions may be either thrown, or caught, by a calling method.
Request for www.aol.com reaches LAN DNS server and is resolved.
Output streams send data one byte at a time, sequentially.
Entire graphs of objects may be serialized to an output stream.
Reading from a UDP packet is simplified by applying input streams.
Local ports identify the application establishing a connection from other programs, allowing multiple TCP applications to run on the same machine.
Application processes can fork in two, having one or more subprocesses perform useful work.
Concurrent access and modification of data by threads leads to data corruption.
Piped communication is only one way, but two pipes may be used.
Thread groups may contain threads and subgroups, which in turn may include more groups and threads.
Invocation of a method on a remote object, executing on a remote machine.
Applets are restricted in their ability to make network connections.
Multiple listeners can register with one or more event sources.
Callback notification of event, for every registered listener Figure 11-8
Callback implemented by invoking a method on a listening object.
Server installation program registers activatable object with rmid, and faulting reference with rmiregistry.
Faulting reference, with the aid of activation system, passes information from activated object back to client.
Objects accessed locally act as a proxy for remote objects.
