License non-trans applicable purpose o implemen portion(s) excerptin Specifica Specifica.
License perpetual the right t patent rig Implemen interfaces Space, or Licensor implemen the applic foregoing hereunder extent of interest in Lead's lic registered.
Specification Lead hereby grants you a fully-paid, non-exclusive, ferable, worldwide, limited license (without the right to sublicense), under Specification Lead's intellectual property rights to view, download, use and reproduce the Specification only for the f internal evaluation.
This includes (i) developing applications intended to run on an tation of the Specification, provided that such applications do not themselves implement any of the Specification, and (ii) discussing the Specification with any third party; and (iii) g brief portions of the Specification in oral or written communications which discuss the tion provided that such excerpts do not in the aggregate constitute a significant portion of the tion.
Specification Lead  also grants you a , non-exclusive, non-transferable, worldwide, fully paid-up, royalty free, limited license (without o sublicense) under any applicable copyrights or, subject to the provisions of subsection 4 below, hts it may have covering the Specification to create and/or distribute an Independent tation of the Specification that: (a) fully implements the Specification including all its required and functionality; (b) does not modify, subset, superset or otherwise extend the Licensor Name include any public or protected packages, classes, Java interfaces, fields or methods within the Name Space other than those required/authorized by the Specification or Specifications being ted; and (c) passes the Technology Compatibility Kit (including satisfying the requirements of able TCK Users Guide) for such Specification ("Compliant Implementation")
In addition, the license is expressly conditioned on your not acting outside its scope.
No license is granted for any other purpose (including, for example, modifying the Specification, other than to the your fair use rights, or distributing the Specification to third parties)
Also, no right, title, or or to any trademarks, service marks, or trade names of Specification Lead or Specification ensors is granted hereunder.
Java, and Java-related logos, marks and names are trademarks or trademarks of Oracle America, Inc.
You need not include limitations (a)-(c) from the previous paragraph or any icular "pass through" requirements in any license You grant concerning the use of your ent Implementation or products derived from it.
However, except with respect to Independent tations (and products derived from them) that satisfy limitations (a)-(c) from the previous , You may neither:  (a) grant or otherwise pass through to your licensees any licenses under.
With respect to any patent claims covered by the license granted under subparagraph 2 above that would be infringed by all technically feasible implementations of the Specification, such license is condition from You are or wo distribute.
Definit implemen binary co includes a mean the “com.orac through th "Technolo provided from Spec allows its which Yo.
For the purposes of this Agreement:  "Independent Implementation" shall mean an tation of the Specification that neither derives from any of Specification Lead's  source code or de materials nor, except with an appropriate and separate license from Specification Lead, ny of Specification Lead's  source code or binary code materials; "Licensor Name Space" shall le”  or their equivalents in any subsequent naming convention adopted by Oracle America, Inc.
In addition, the Specification could include technical inaccuracies or typographical errors.
The Spec in other c that it has delivery t.
Government or by a ernment prime contractor or subcontractor (at any tier), then the Government's rights in the and accompanying documentation shall be only as set forth in this license; this is in accordance .F.R.
Convention for the International Sale of Goods and the choice of law rules of any jurisdiction pply.
Licensee agrees to comply strictly with all such laws and regulations and acknowledges the responsibility to obtain such licenses to export, re-export or import as may be required after o Licensee.
No modification to this Agreement will be binding, unless in writing and signed by an authorized representative of each party.
Inevitably, the number of technologies used to create even simple lications had grown by leaps and bounds.
By incorporating many of these APIs, the Web Profile raising the bar for what should be considered a basic stack for the ment of web applications using the Java platform.
Furthermore, this stack be easy to grow, so as to address any remaining developer needs.
Against this drive towards completeness, one wishes to balance a desire to limit the footprint of web containers, both in physical and in conceptual terms.
From the point of view of developers learning the Web Profile, it is more valuable to have a small, focused profile, with as little overlap between technologies as possible APIs.
Fin with mo offer a c extensio (“à la c.
Not list of re beyond of the J to be us underst apply to version much e light on se.
It also relies on the pluggability features in the specification to allow applications to use libraries that extend the servlet er with minimal configuration overhead.
It is conceivable that products will hoice at installation time between different configurations, some richer in ns, or even allow for complete customization beyond the required core.
Being the first profile ava EE 6 Platform to be defined, we expect the Web Profile specification ed as a model for future profiles.
It will also be seen as a starting point for anding how the requirements defined in the Java EE Platform specification a profile that subsets the platform itself, a significant innovation in this.
The case of a profile that is a superset of the platform is asier to picture.) To help with this process, this section attempts to shed how one should go from the definition of the Web Profile to figuring out.
As dictated by the general rules for Java EE profiles in the Platform specific.
The Profile follow a specific Platform requirem must im Platform compon.
As Java M the Web implem requirem other ha ation, products that implement the Web Profile must honor: equirements of the Java EE Platform specification that apply to all profiles;
For example, Web Profile s must implement the Servlet API, which in turn means they need to ll the requirements listed in the Servlet specification.
As a first example, since a Web product is required to implement the Servlet technology, it must also ll general requirements for Java EE web containers in the Platform ation.
Additionally, it must follow all security requirements in the specification that pertain to Java EE web containers, all interoperability ents for such containers, etc.
Since it is not a required component of Profile, Web Profile products are not required to include an entation of JMS, nor do they have to support other JMS-related.
On the nd, a Web Profile product that included an implementation of JMS would.
Particular care should be taken when determining applicable requirements based on the presence of EJB Lite in the Web Profile.
As described in the EJB specific related which A the requ requirem.
When examining an EJBrequirement in the Java EE Platform spec, one must first of all determine PI classes, component types and EJB container services are mentioned in irement itself.
Only if all of them fall inside the EJB Lite subset that ent is considered applicable to Web Profile products.
The Expert Group work for this specification was conducted by means of ://javaee-spec.java.net project in order to provide transparency to the.
The terms used to refer to ments in this specification are included in parentheses.
