No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the information presented.
However, the information contained in this book is sold without warranty, either express or implied.
Neither the author, nor Packt Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals.
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
His other specialties include data-mining/visualization techniques and tuning continuous integrated environments.
From a very early age, Charalampos showed particular interest in advanced Mathematics and software development and has been honored twice at the Panhellenic Mathematical Contest for providing prototype and innovative solutions.
After graduation, he dynamically entered the enterprise field, where he helped his organization make the transition from legacy client server ERP and CRM applications to full-stack J2EE web applications, all in a streamlined and integrated development environment.
When not working he enjoys blogging, playing the classical guitar, and composing music, exploring new ways to translate polynomial equations to sound.
I would like to thank and express my gratitude to Lefteris Ntouanoglou for providing me with guidance and vision in the IT field especially in the last two years, and Olivier Gaudin and Fabrice Bellingard for their interest in the book.
From the Packt Publishing staff, I would like to thank, in particular, Newton Sequeira, Ashwin Shetty, Sai Gamare, and Usha Iyer for supporting and guiding me through the writing process, and all the technical reviewers for their helpful suggestions.
Christopher Bartling has been in the IT industry since 1995
He has served in the roles of application developer, mentor, and agile coach.
He also has experience in biometrics, genomics and computational biology, healthcare, insurance, and legal/regulatory domains.
He also helps develop and deliver training for DevJam (http://www.devjam.com)
Prior to his career in IT, he was involved in electrophysiology and biomedical research at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester Minnesota.
You can find his blog at http://bartling.blogspot.com and tweets at @cbartling.
Efraim Kyriakidis is a skilled software engineer with over seven years of experience in developing and delivering software solutions for diverse customers.
He's well versed in all stages of the software development lifecycle.
Through his career, he mainly worked with Microsoft Technologies and has an interest in technologies such as Silverlight and Windows Phone.
Kosmas Mackrogamvrakis was born in 1971 on the island of Crete in Greece.
He moved at an early age to the capital of Greece, Athens.
There he attended public school and graduated as an engineer in Automatic Electronics.
Later, he continued his studies at the Technical School of Computers in Athens, but he was forced to interrupt, as he was obliged to join the army.
In the army he served as a Sergeant in the artillery section and trained in computer-guided canon targeting, based on his previous knowledge of computer technology.
Even before high school, he was highly interested in computer science, and he managed to learn Basic, Pascal, and Assembly language.
After his army obligations, he was employed by Athens News Agency, where he worked as a technician and desktop-publishing employee.
In parallel, he installed a Fax distribution network with Canada, for redistribution of a FAX newspaper.
After three years he moved to Hellenic Scientific S.A., as a technician.
There he managed to get trained and show his natural talent in computer engineering.
After seven years, and due to market needs and degradation of the company's share in the market, he moved to freelancing.
As a freelancer, he supported a large number of small-to medium-sized companies, as systems engineer, consultant, and technician.
After seven years of freelancing, he was asked by Siemens to undertake the position of Systems Engineer for the public sector and later Project Manager.
After three years in Siemens, the public sector IT support stopped in Greece, and he left the company.
Lately, and right after Siemens, he undertook the position of IT Services Manager for southeast Europe in Adidas.
He has extensive administrative and management experience in the software sector.
Prior to Schoox Inc, he joined a European startup company, OTS SA, which developed administrative and financial software for the Public Sector.
He served the company from a various number of managerial positions and as the COO of the company he built one of the largest software companies in Greece.
During his PhD, he developed computer algorithms for fast computation of holographic patterns and graduated with Honor.
In 1998, he was praised with the Award of Innovation from the Association of Holographic Techniques in Germany for inventing and implementing an innovative anticounterfeiting system based on a coded Holographic Label and a Web Application.
He is a highly skilled engineer and a visionary entrepreneur.
Implementing new ideas and turning them into successful business by building and motivating strong and result-oriented teams is one of his strengths.
He was born and grew up in Germany and speaks fluent Greek, German, and English.
Support files, eBooks, discount offers and more You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related to your book.
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.
Get in touch with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital book library.
Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire library of books.
Free Access for Packt account holders If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books.
Preface Developers continuously strive to achieve higher levels of source code quality.
It is the holy grail in the software development industry.
Sonar is an all-out platform confronting quality from numerous aspects as it covers quality on seven axes, provides an abundance of hunting tools to pinpoint code defects, and continuously generates quality reports following the continuous inspection paradigm in an integrated environment.
It offers a complete and cost-effective quality management solution, an invaluable tool for every business.
Sonar is an open source platform used by development teams to manage source code quality.
Sonar has been developed with this main objective in mind: make code quality management accessible to everyone with minimal effort.
As such, Sonar provides code analyzers, reporting tools, manual reviews, defect-hunting modules, and Time Machine as core functionalities.
It also comes with a plugin mechanism enabling the community to extend the functionality, making Sonar the one-stop-shop for source code quality by addressing not only the developer's requirements, but also the manager's needs.
Sonar Code Quality Testing Essentials will help you understand the different factors that define code quality and how to improve your own or your team's code using Sonar.
You will learn to use Sonar effectively and explore the quality of your source code on the following axes:
Through practical examples, you will customize Sonar components and widgets to identify areas where your source code is lacking.
The book goes on to propose good practices and common solutions that you can put to use to improve such code.
You will start with installing and setting up a Sonar server and performing your first project analysis.
Then you will go through the process of creating a custom and balanced quality profile exploring all Sonar components through practical examples.
After reading the book, you will be able to analyze any project using Sonar and know how to read and evaluate quality metrics.
Hunting potential bugs and eliminating complexity are the hottest topics regarding code quality.
The book will guide you through the process of finding such problematic areas, leveraging and customizing the most appropriate components.
While you improve code and design through the book, you will notice that metrics go high and alerts turn green.
You will use the Time Machine and the Timeline to examine how your changes affected the quality.
Sonar Code Quality Testing Essentials will enable you to perform custom quality analysis on any Java project and quickly gain insight on even large code bases, as well as provide possible solutions to code defects and complexity matters.
What this book covers Chapter 1, An Overview of Sonar, covers the Sonar quality management platform and its features.
It also discusses the different aspects of quality and the role of metrics.
Chapter 2, Installing Sonar, guides you to successfully installing the Sonar platform, and how to perform basic administration tasks such as backing up project data and installing plugins.
Chapter 3, Analyzing Your First Project, walks you through setting up a project for analysis and showcasing the Sonar dashboard.
Finally, you will eliminate violations and further reflect on project quality and progression.
You will learn how to detect coding standards errors and eliminate code violations through practical examples.
Chapter 5, Managing Measures and Getting Feedback, introduces Sonar quality profiles and discusses different development needs and rule sets.
Additionally, the reader will learn how to create custom metric alerts and get visual feedback on quality and review historical data.
Chapter 6, Hunting Potential Bugs, covers code violations that can lead to potential software bugs.
You will learn how to use Sonar hunting tools to detect such violations following practical examples.
Chapter 7, Refining Your Documentation, teaches how to find undocumented source code.
Chapter 8, Working with Duplicated Code, discusses code duplication and guides you on how to spot duplicated code and possible methods to eliminate it.
Chapter 9, Analyzing Complexity and Design, covers how software complexity is presented in Sonar and further discusses  complexity metrics.
You will get a good grasp of complexity metrics and learn how to identify and review them with Sonar.
Chapter 10, Code Coverage and Testing, covers how Sonar measures code coverage and how it helps in writing cost-effective unit tests covering complexity that matters.
Chapter 11, Integrating Sonar, introduces you to the Continuous Inspection Paradigm and serves as a reference guide on how to set up and enable an integrated build environment providing constant Sonar quality reporting.
What you need for this book You will need the following software to follow the examples:
Who this book is for This book is for you if you are a Java developer or a Team Manager familiar with Java and want to ensure the quality of your code using Sonar.
You should have a background with Java and unit testing in general.
The book follows a step-by-step tutorial enriched with practical examples and the necessary screenshots for easy and quick learning.
Conventions In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between different kinds of information.
Here are some examples of these styles, and an explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "Open a command prompt and type the telnet command."
When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block, the relevant lines or items are set in bold:
Words that you see on the screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "Select Add filter to navigate to filter configuration settings screen"
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Let us know what you think about this book—what you liked or may have disliked.
Reader feedback is important for us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, and mention the book title through the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to help you to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the example code You can download the example code files for all Packt books you have purchased from your account at http://www.packtpub.com.
If you purchased this book elsewhere, you can visit http://www.packtpub.com/support and register to have the files e-mailed directly to you.
Errata Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do happen.
By doing so, you can save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this book.
If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.com/support, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, and entering the details of your errata.
Once your errata are verified, your submission will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded to our website, or added to any list of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title.
Piracy Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media.
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously.
If you come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you valuable content.
Questions You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.
An Overview of Sonar This chapter provides an overview of Sonar, presenting the objectives and features of the platform, and highlighting how developers and software quality benefit from it.
It follows an overview of the platform's architecture, so as to gain a better understanding about how Sonar analyzes and measures quality.
Finally, the chapter closes by discussing the Sonar community and its ecosystem.
What is Sonar Sonar is a software quality management platform primarily for Java programming language, enabling developers to access and track code analysis data ranging from styling errors, potential bugs, and code defects to design inefficiencies, code duplication, lack of test coverage, and excess complexity.
Everything that affects our code base, from minor styling details to critical design errors, is inspected and evaluated by Sonar.
While the primary supported language is Java, more languages are supported with extensions or commercial plugins, for example C, PHP, and JavaScript.
At the time of writing, more than 10 languages were supported with plans to add more in the future.
The additional languages are supported in the form of plugins, taking advantage of the platform's extensible and flexible architecture.
How it works Sonar collects and analyzes source code, measuring quality and providing reports for your projects.
It combines static and dynamic analysis tools and enables quality to be measured continuously over time.
More than 600 code rules are incorporated into the platform, checking the code from different perspectives.
Rules are separated into different logical groups and each one contributes at a different level towards the overall quality of the project in case.
Analysis results, code violations, and historical data are all available and accessible through a well-thought-out user interface consisting of different components, with each one serving and fulfilling different needs and scopes.
To achieve this, Sonar drills down to your code layer by layer, moving from module level down to class level.
Picture this as a vertical movement through your source code from top to bottom components.
At each level, Sonar performs both static and dynamic analysis producing metric values and statistics, revealing problematic areas in the source that require inspection or improvement.
The analysis is not a monolithic procedure but examines code from different perspectives, introducing the concept of axes of quality.
The results are then interpreted and consolidated in a very informative and visually appealing dashboard, enabling you to form an opinion about defective code and quality testing over projects.
You can now take educated decisions as to where to start fixing things in a cost-effective manner, reducing the technical debt.
Although Sonar can be run as a one-off auditor, where the platform really shines is when you have it track and check your source code continuously.
While a single inspection proves to be useful at times, it does not make the most out of the platform.
The intended use is to have Sonar integrated into the team's development process, exploiting the platform's true capabilities.
If all these sound complex and advanced, they are not.
It is a matter of a single download and running a script to have Sonar up and running, waiting to assess our code.
Afterward, we can choose among different methods of how to import projects into the platform for analysis.
What makes Sonar different What makes Sonar really stand out is that it not only provides metrics and statistics about your code but translates these nondescript values to real business values such as risk and technical debt.
This conversion plays a major role in the philosophy of the platform enabling a new business dimension to unfold, which is invaluable to project management.
Sonar not only addresses to core developers and programmers but to project managers and even higher managerial levels as well, due to the management aspect it offers.
This concept is strengthened more by Sonar's enhanced reporting capabilities and multiple views addressing source code from different perspectives.
From a managerial perspective, transparent and continuous access on historical data enables the manager to ask the right questions.
To better illustrate this, the following are some possible cases discussing quality and source code matters based on feedback from Sonar, either visual or textual:
Case 2: Many major violations popped up during the last iteration.
Case 3: Documentation is lacking and team composition is about to change.
Let us clarify and better explain what our code is about.
At least the public API! (Big red boxes represent undocumented public APIs.)
Sonar in the lifecycle Sonar in the development environment acts as a quality management center.
It is the place of reference when code quality matters arise, and sessions with team members drilling down views, exploring deficiencies and discussing software design and its implementation are not uncommon.
The ease of the installation process and the broad accessibility by the web interface make it a perfect choice to inspect and share code quality among managers and developers.
An extra step is added to the developers' lifecycle, that of quality review and inspection.
After updating and committing code, tests are executed within the context of the build server, producing a fresh artifact.
Then, Sonar takes over collecting and analyzing source code and test results.
Once the analysis process is complete, the Sonar dashboard is updated with inspection data reflecting the latest changes.
It is vital not to force Sonar into the development process but let the team embrace it.
Let us put technical details and issues aside for a moment and focus more on the psychological aspect of this process as a whole.
There is no more rewarding experience for a developer than watching the results of his/her work on a daily basis, experiencing how his/her actions directly reflect upon the improvisation of the final product.
Eventually, Sonar proves to be an essential part of a development setup, while the whole process becomes second nature to the developer.
There is one obstacle though that every development team will meet, that of the fear barrier and how to get over it.
And by fear, we mean the fear to expose the quality of team members' source code, or most importantly the lack of it.
What you can do is run Sonar undercover for a couple of iterations, touching and bettering only your code, escaping comments and reviews on team members.
Another approach would be to use it only as an information tool, without emphasizing it.
Once you start writing better code, and have substantially improved and corrected errors, you can then host a team session highlighting the platform, presenting the positive effects upon the project, in an effort to encourage team members to use it for improvisation.
One good point would be to emphasize on how rewarding the experience is to watch quality grow over time in response to code corrections and design changes.
This warm feeling is the best incentive for each and every developer.
Features of Sonar The Sonar platform comes with a vast array of components in order to provide insightful and accurate information.
Moreover, its flexible architecture allows functionality to be added on demand via a plugin system.
Let's take a closer look at the features the core platform has to offer:
Overview of all projects With Sonar's project dashboard, you gain quick access to and insight about all your projects through a comprehensive dashboard.
The dashboard presents vital quality metrics in an efficient way, highlights sections which require your attention, and finally includes common interface practicalities, such as sorting, adding, or removing columns to make browsing easier.
The majority of the user interface is implemented in AJAX and the transitions between the different views and drilldowns are quick and smooth.
Likewise, the components of the platform from simple to more complex ones are very responsive and react in a timely fashion to your actions.
The dashboard is fully customizable, and you can select which metric columns each view contains and reorder them as you like.
The ability to internationalize the platform is a huge plus allowing you to present a total solution covering every aspect, from pleasant and practical interface to language settings.
Generally speaking, language friendliness is very much welcomed if you intend to provide a Sonar instance to a less-technical audience.
If you want to take look at the Sonar dashboard in full swing, point your browser at Nemo, a Sonar demo instance by SonarSource S.A.
Coding rules More than 600 rules are incorporated into Sonar, performing simple checks to complex calculations.
Rules can be fully parameterized to meet different development needs, and if this is not enough, with a little help from the lively community, you can even implement your own, covering every possible need.
The strictest Sonar profile includes about 720 rules, but probably you won't ever need to activate it.
It is not even suggested to use all of them at all.
The objective is to provide as many coding rules as possible and let the developer make choices accordingly, assigning them to custom profiles for projects.
Obviously, there is the ability to host multiple different profiles with specific sets of rules and further assign these profiles to different projects for maximum flexibility.
Standard software metrics Metrics are necessary to form objective and reliable opinion on any piece of software.
Like in every science or process, metrics are essential to measure and reproduce behavior and functionality, and help evaluate/compare source code, establishing a common ground among different pieces of software.
In other words, metrics form a common denominator for all software and they have become an integral part of the development process.
Not a magic bullet Sonar is not a magic bullet.
A solid development process, creativity, dedication, and practical design are still some of the necessary virtues to create a successful and quality product.
Writing code for the sake of metrics is basically cheating.
Tricking the system to produce desirable results, disconnected from the functional requirements, is as you understand underproductive.
Such a bad practice only detracts from the final product instead of improving it.
One use for software metrics, which does not have to do directly with quality is that they can also provide insight and deeper knowledge about the source code, revealing potential pitfalls, and providing a safe guideline for new developers to follow.
Sonar includes all classical metrics related to software development, some of them being:
Unit tests If you have at least a couple of development years under your belt at some time or another, you have probably wondered how you could ever manage without writing any tests for your code.
Untested software results in an unstable product, not working as expected.
Experience shows that the first thing the end user does with an untested feature ends up to be unexpected and never taken into consideration during development.
Random input, experimenting, or using the feature/component for something other than what it was designed for, are all viable and very real cases.
While clients demand dynamic help systems and comprehensive manuals, they never ever read them, expecting the software to meet their expectations one way or another.
Software testing verifies that a feature will work as expected and meets design requirements.
However, writing tests for the sake of testing only to cheat the metrics, covering low-risk code, and leaving out crucial areas, is pointless.
This kind of testing, while it consumes time and resources, adds nothing to the final quality of your product.
Sonar identifies high-risk software pieces and locates untested code not only at line, but even at branch level, taking into consideration all possible outcomes of a conditional operation.
Additionally, Sonar provides useful statistics concerning test successes and total duration.
Drill down to source code Knowing where quality suffers and what aspects of your software need to be strengthened is one thing, specifically locating these problematic areas is another.
Sonar features smart components as the metrics radiator that in combination with the dashboard allow you to drill down effortlessly to your source code reaching classes that require attention quickly.
It may sound like a complex investigative task or an alternative search tool for your source code but this is not the case.
Drill down is a standard professional method used to browse code.
You set a focal point, undocumented code for example, and move downwards from summary information to more detailed data, subsequently exploring modules, packages, and classes.
Time Machine Sonar stores all analysis results in a database, preserving historical data for future reference and comparison, enabling you to track the evolution of your code.
At any time you can check out a past version of your codebase from the repository and add it to the project's time line for comparison.
Examining a data point in isolation can enlighten your team about the state of the code in the given time frame, but the information accumulated by the historical data proves to be invaluable in the long run, helping to determine the best approach for the health of your project.
You can examine the progress of your code using one of the three different components available: the Time Machine, the Motion Chart, and the Timeline.
Each component can be dynamically customized to access historical data on all metrics supported.
The Motion Chart, the fanciest of the components, features an animated bubble chart tracking metrics in four different dimensions: the X and Y axes, plus the color and size of the bubbles.
Maven ready Maven is a build automation tool like Ant, streamlining the steps of the build process in software development.
Checking out code, compiling, generating documentation and reports, running tests, producing artifacts, and finally deploying them, are some of the goals supported by Maven and implemented via plugins.
Different profiles described in XML configuration files dictate the execution steps that take place during the build process while providing configuration details.
The Sonar platform takes advantage of the Maven goal-oriented philosophy, simplifying configuration.
All you have to do is add the Sonar Maven Plugin into your project to get support for Sonar-oriented goals.
The only requirement is to have the Sonar server up whenever the goal is executed.
Basically, the setup requires zero or minimal configuration if you are familiar with Maven.
User friendly Much thought and work has been put into the platform's user interface in regards to both appearance and behavior.
The clean interface is mostly self-explanatory but if you have any queries or feel like clarifying some things more, there is plenty of documentation and media available within the Sonar community covering many topics, from traditional getting started wikis to screencasts exploring advanced Sonar features.
It is important to note here the web nature of the user interface, accessible straight from your browser.
Unified components Sonar introduces a new paradigm on measuring quality without trying to reinvent the wheel in the field of metrics and rules.
While it features its own implemented set of rules, under the hood most work is handled by familiar and long-trusted tools.
Sonar unifies these tools, leveraging existing functionality, collecting output, and finally refining the results to follow suit with the platform's objective.
Obviously, the procedure of running these tools manually in sequence to produce raw values and statistics is now rendered obsolete, since Sonar automatically streams the whole process in one combined analysis step.
Security measures Sonar features a standard role-based authentication system allowing you to secure your instance, create as many users as required, and assign them to groups.
A user can belong to more than one group, while access to the various Sonar services and functionality can be fine-grained by assigning appropriate roles.
Anyone: is a group that exists in the system but cannot be managed.
Sonar-users: is the default group to which every user exists.
It is not possible to configure the name of this group.
Of the four roles available in Sonar, one is global, referring to the instance, and the three others are attached to projects:
Global Administrators: Can perform all administration functions for the instance: global configuration, personalization of the Time Machine, and the home page.
Project Administrators: Can perform administration functions for a project by accessing its settings.
Project Users: Can navigate through every service of a project, except viewing source code and settings.
Project Code Viewers: Can view the source code of a project.
If a global security system exists within your environment, such as Atlassian Crowd SSO, LDAP, or Microsoft Active Directory, you can delegate all Sonar authentication function to these systems using the appropriate plugins.
Extensible plugin system The Sonar platform is extensible via a plugin system.
More functionality can be added using plugins, either open source or commercial.
A dedicated repository located at http://sonar-plugins.codehaus.org/ hosts the Sonar plugin library.
From there, you can choose and download the plugins you require for your Sonar instance and read documentation and installation instructions specifically written for each one separately.
Plugins enable Sonar to measure more programming languages, add more metrics and rules, and integrate the platform with third-party systems such as LDAP or Continuous Integration build servers.
Some of the more interesting plugins and a brief description of what they do are shown in the following list:
Additional metrics: ° Build stability: Reports on stability of project build using Continuous.
Integration engine data ° Rules meter: Gives information on the level of activation of projects'
Sonargraph: Provides architecture governance features accompanied by metrics about cyclic dependencies and other structural aspects.
Useless code: Reports on the number of lines that can be reduced in an application.
Switch off violations: Excludes some violations in a fine-grained way.
Covering software quality on Seven Axes First of all, it is important to point out that quality is a perceptional concept and quite subjective.
One way to define software quality is through abstractions and examining it from different perspectives.
I cdnuolt blveiee taht I cluod aculaclty uesdnatnrd waht I was rdgnieg.
It deosn't mttaer in waht oredr the leteerrs in a wrod are, the olny iprmoatnt tihng is taht the frist and lsat ltteer be in the rghit pclae.
The rset can be a taotl msess and you can sitll raed it wouthit a porbelm.
Tihs is bcuseae the huamn mnid deos not raed ervey lteter by istlef, but the wrod as a wlohe.
The preceding text does not contain one single word spelled correctly but proves to be readable.
The preceding paragraph tests the human brain's ability to recognize common patterns rather than convey a message to the reader.
From a product perspective, someone could support that although the text is flawed it does the job, since it manages to remain understandable.
But this has the side effect of deteriorating the final reading experience, requiring additional effort to reconstruct the words and phrases.
The reader unconsciously stresses his mind in an effort to adapt and decipher the messed-up words, sharing focus between restructuring text, and understanding what is actually written, a not-so-pleasant user experience.
On the other hand, the editor assigned to improve or add to the text would have to cope with this non-standard writing practice delaying the whole process.
Switch the corrupt text for a software product's source code.
The reader is now the end user of the product and the editor the developer.
They both experience product quality differently, each one from their own views.
The end user from a functional perspective while the developer from a structural one.
External quality—assures that the product obeys to the functional requirements/specifications.
Internal quality—assures that the software's structure supports the delivery of the functional requirements.
To measure external quality the product is treated like a black box, testing and interacting  its exposed features, observing behavior, and reassuring that it works as expected according to the requirements.
To measure internal quality, esoteric inspection of the software is required.
The structure of the source code is analyzed and evaluated against coding standards and practices.
As for software design, it is necessary to examine at what level it adheres to basic principles of software architecture.
This approach of measuring quality is referred to as a white box approach because it deals with the software's internal workings, peeking inside source code.
The Sonar platform does exactly that, measuring the internal quality of a software piece.
However, it is important to note that high internal quality does not enforce or guarantee external quality, but it indirectly betters it in terms of its overall outcome.
How Sonar manages quality Software quality measurement is a quantitative process summing up weighted attribute values, which in part describe specific software characteristics.
For each characteristic, a set of such measurable attributes is defined, and the existence of such characteristic, or its quality factor, is directly correlated to those attributes.
As a matter of fact, quality is rated along many different dimensions.
Likewise, Sonar classifies associated attributes and metrics in seven dimensions, seven technical axes of quality which the Sonar team prefers to cal them as:
DRY—Don't Repeat Yourself Don't Repeat Yourself is a programming principle aimed at reducing repetition of code.
Every piece of knowledge must have a single, unambiguous, authoritative representation within a system.
Source code written with this principle in mind is obviously easier to maintain.
When a bug arises, there is only one single point in the source responsible for the malfunction and patching this point would suffice, without the need to modify other parts of the software.
Architecture of Sonar The core engine of the platform, Squid, is supported by additional code analyzers which Sonar orchestrates together to measure quality.
The following diagram represents the upper-level components of the platform and how they interact with each other:
Sonar receives the request and starts analyzing the project's source code.
The analysis is based on the project's Sonar profile activating any additional plugins or reporting capabilities, if any.
When the analysis is over, results are stored to a database for future reference and history tracking.
Finally, the user interface and its components are updated with the new data.
You can access data from your browser and the web dashboard.
Conveniently, Sonar reporting is also made available within your IDE, either Eclipse or IDEA, allowing you to review and correct code violations on the spot.
In a continuously integrated environment, the analysis process is triggered by the build server.
The server checks out source code from the repository, compiles and executes all unit or integration tests, after which it produces the necessary builds.
A good practice for a time-consuming process such as this is to trigger it once a day, when developers are inactive.
The process is then called a nightly job and the final build produced a nightly snapshot.
Next time, developers will have access to the latest data and reports about the project, enabling them to review how recent changes affected the overall quality of the project.
Source code analyzers To analyze code, Sonar utilizes some of the most popular and proven tools available in the open source community.
These tools pass through source code performing standard checks reviewing errors and possible bugs, each from their own perspective.
The nature of the checks range from minor styling ones, for example the detection of unwanted trailing spaces, to more complex ones that easily promote to potential bugs, such as unchecked variables eligible to result in null references.
Since version 2.1 Sonar provides its own rules engine too, based on Squid.
Squid Sonar's core analyzer Squid, works on Java dependencies and calculates object-oriented metrics.
It implements the visitor pattern to visit dependencies between methods, fields, classes, and packages.
Checkstyle Checkstyle ensures that all source code adheres to coding standards.
Its main duty is to check code from an aesthetic perspective with emphasis on layout and styling.
However, during its development more checks were added straying away from the initial coding style and standards concept.
Now Checkstyle is capable of performing broader checks  like  identifying class design problems, duplication, and common bug patterns.
Checkstlyle, and the rest of the tools we are going to examine here, can also run standalone.
Bug patterns A bug pattern is badly structured code that under certain circumstances can produce errors.
These vulnerabilities may not always fail a test case but can potentially lead to memory outage, performance degradation, security breaches, and many other problems.
Such common error-prone structures have been identified and standardized, so that they can be identified easily by source code analyzers.
In any case, the following are some interpretations taken straight away from the What does it mean section of the project 's SourceForge page:
Head on to PMD's home page for a more comprehensive list.
FindBugs FindBugs performs static analysis to check source code and trace bugs and defects.
It covers many different aspects such as vulnerabilities, malicious code, performance, and coding standards.
Cobertura and Clover Cobertura, based on the jcoverage Java library, is used to calculate the percentage of code accessed by tests and identify which parts of your source code lack test coverage.
Additionally, it calculates cyclomatic complexity for each class and the average cyclomatic complexity for each package.
Clover emphasizes more on test coverage, providing a rich user interface and can be easily used as a standalone tool, offering a complete quality testing solution.
The Sonar community and ecosystem Sonar, like every respectable open source project, comes with a thriving community and a vibrant ecosystem built around it.
The community features four separate mailing lists to discuss everything Sonar:
A dedicated issue tracker to track Sonar development and submit tickets can be found at the following URL:
A comprehensive documentation wiki maintained by Sonar's team members can be found at:
If you want to learn more about Sonar or even write your own plugins for the platform, Sonar's plugin ecosystem in combination with a friendly and welcoming community provides everything you will need.
You can subscribe to the developers' list, request access to Sonar's source control management system Forge, and benefit from the continuous integration environment that has been set up to serve development needs by navigating to the following URL:
The SonarSource company Sonar was founded in 2008 by SonarSource S.A., a Swiss company that brought forth a bold statement:
Thus Sonar was born, in an effort to fulfill the company's objective to create a platform that would enable easy and continuous access to code quality metrics.
The big picture was the platform to achieve such high adoption rates, capable of establishing it as a commodity in development teams along with IDEs.
The company did not only succeed, but pushed things further with the introduction of the Continuous Inspection paradigm similar to the Continuous Integration practices, a movement that is now considered to be a best practice among development teams and members especially in the context of an agile environment.
Awards and conferences SonarSource, since its inception has jolted the software industry, creating an innovative platform that caused significant impact as long as quality management is considered.
In comparison to other tools, the Sonar platform was revolutionary, inventing a new method towards quality inspection, which later became a standard practice under the term Continuous Inspection.
Therefore, in 2010 it received the Jolt Productivity Award for providing a manager's best friend with highlights on the detailed dashboard, the tracking of historical data, and code analysis from different perspectives.
After initial versions of the platform were publicly released, Sonar was presented at numerous JavaOne conferences and was recommended as the tool of choice to measure, track, and gain access to code quality data.
In most cases, the platform was sitting next to a Hudson/Jenkins build server in a continuous integration setup.
Sonar license The Sonar platform is open source and distributed under the GNU Lesser General Public License Version 3, the most widely used license for free software.
This means that you can modify and redistribute the platform freely as long as all software and modifications released still remain under the GPL Version 3
Apart from the core platform and the free plugins developed and gardened by the community, SonarSource company offers commercial products built around the extensible Sonar ecosystem.
Worth mentioning is the SQALE plugin, a full implementation of the Software Quality Assessment method based on Lifecycle Expectations.
If you want to learn more about this method you can point your browser at http://www.sonarsource.com and navigate from there to the plugins section.
Additionally, among other services, SonarSource company offers professional support carried out by Sonar's core contributors and accepts requests to develop plugins on demand in case additional functionality is required.
Summary This chapter gave an overview of the Sonar platform, its history, and its features.
We further explored the concept of quality in software products and how it is measured.
We analyzed the methodology of covering quality on seven axes and detailed the Sonar architecture along with the code analyzers it provides.
Finally, we took a closer look around the Sonar community and its ecosystem.
In the next chapter, we will focus on setting up the environment and installing Sonar along with plugins.
Installing Sonar In this chapter, we will install Sonar along with required software in either Linux or Windows.
We will need to install MySQL, create a new database to store Sonar data, install Maven to import projects easily into Sonar, configure it to run as a service, and finally secure our instance by creating groups and users.
Then, we will go through the process of installing plugins, updating Sonar from the update center, and backing up our data.
Starting Sonar as a service •	 Logging in to Sonar for the first time.
Prerequisites for Sonar Before installing Sonar, it is necessary to check that our host system meets all the requirements.
Sonar comes bundled with the Apache Derby database, but it is highly recommended to use an enterprise database, especially when deploying on to a production environment.
A minimum of 512 MB of RAM and sufficient data space to store Sonar's analysis results and historical data are required.
Users will interact with Sonar through web browsers and it is recommended to enable JavaScript if not already enabled.
Finally, installing the Maven project builder is highly recommended to make the process of adding new projects for analysis much easier.
Before moving on, let's make sure that Java, Maven, and MySQL are properly installed and configured.
Checking your Java installation To check your Java installation, open up a terminal or a command prompt if you are in Windows and enter the following command:
If Java is installed and correctly configured, the output will be something like this:
If is not installed, visit Oracle's official website and follow the installation instructions for your system (http://www.java.com/en/download/manual.jsp)
After the installation process is complete, we have to set the JAVA_HOME system variable.
In Linux, edit the .bashrc or .bash_profile configuration files, and append the following lines and substitute the path highlighted in the following snippet with yours:
Next, for the changes to take place, we have to reload the configuration files by typing the following command:
Edit .bashrc or .bash_profile, and append the following lines and replace the path highlighted in the following code snippet with yours:
Again, reload the configuration files by using the following command:
If everything is done right, the console should show output something like this:
Installing Maven on Windows The installation process in Windows is exactly the same as in Linux, with one difference.
To verify that the variables are set, open a command prompt and type:
Installing MySQL on Linux To install MySQL on a Debian or Ubuntu-based Linux distribution, open a terminal and enter the following command:
When the installation process finishes, the MySQL service starts automatically.
To install for Red Hat distributions such as Fedora or CentOS, open a terminal and enter the following yum command as root:
To create a root account with the MySQL admin utility, enter the following command, substituting password with one of your choice:
To connect to the MySQL Server, type the following command, and enter the root password when prompted:
To check the version of the MySQL Server install, use the MySQL command with the version switch:
Installing MySQL on Windows On Windows, download the MSI installer for the MySQL Community Server from http://dev.mysql.com/downloads/mysql/ and double-click on the msi or exe file to start the installation process.
An installation wizard will guide you through the process of creating a new MySQL service and a root account.
The official MySQL website provides comprehensive documentation and detailed installation guides for all operating systems, just in case.
Downloading Sonar Sonar is updated frequently, with each release packing a couple of new features and improvements.
Visit http://www.sonarsource.org/downloads/ to get an overview of the releases and download links.
From there download the latest version—notice that whether you are on Linux or Windows, the download is the same, since Sonar is based on Java and it is compatible with both.
All downloads are zip archives named after Sonar's version following this convention:
For the needs of this book, we will go with Sonar v.
After the download is complete, extract the zip archive into a directory of our choice.
It is a good practice to create a servers directory and extract Sonar in there.
Do not unzip Sonar into a directory starting with a digit.
Installing the Sonar web server Place the downloaded file in the directory to which you want to install Sonar, open the terminal window, and enter the following command to unzip it:
To start the Sonar server in Linux, open a terminal, navigate in to the bin directory, and execute the startup script for your platform.
When Sonar starts for the first time, it creates and populates the embedded Apache Derby database, so it is natural for it to take a while.
Open a browser and go at http://localhost:9000/ to take a first look at the Sonar dashboard.
To stop the Sonar server type, execute the following command:
Alternatively, you can press Ctrl + C in the console/terminal, to make the Sonar server exit gracefully:
Notice that, if you close the command-line window, the server will stop.
The context path is /.To change these settings, edit the conf/sonar.properties configuration file accordingly.
Open it with an editor and look for the WEB SETTINGS section inside the file.
Listen host/port and context path (for example / or /sonar)
Sonar can be run inside a J2EE server and deployed as any other web application.
To do this, browse into Sonar's war directory and execute build-war.sh or build-war.bat on Windows to create the Sonar server war application.
Notice that when deploying to an application server, the Sonar home directory is still needed to store data and host plugins.
Thus, the application server must have read/write access to this directory.
Configuring MySQL While the embedded Apache Derby database is ideal for tests, in a production development environment it is recommended to switch to an enterprise database.
Creating the database Sonar comes bundled with an SQL script to create the database and the sonar user with the password sonar.
To execute the script, open up a terminal and execute the following command, (enter your root password or sonar when prompted):
The script creates a new Sonar database with UTF8 encoding and user sonar with password sonar.
Setting up Sonar with MySQL Having the database up and running, we then must deactivate the embedded Apache Derby and enable MySQL in the conf/sonar.properties configuration file.
Stop the server if running, and comment the following lines to disable Apache Derby:
Comment the following lines to deactivate the default embedded database.
Find the MySQL configuration section in the same file and uncomment the following lines to enable MySQL:
Next time the sever launches, it will establish connection to the MySQL sonar database as user sonar/sonar and create all required tables.
Wait for the MySQL database to initialize, and enter the following commands in a terminal to view the tables created (when asked for your password enter sonar):
Starting Sonar as a service It is most convenient to have the Sonar server start automatically at each boot time.
Thus, the final step of the setup is to have it installed as a service.
Run as a service on Linux Create the file /etc/init.d/sonar with the Vim or Nano editor:
Reboot, open a browser, and go to http://localhost:9000/ to verify that the server is running.
Run as a service on Windows To install or uninstall the Windows service, simply execute one of the following scripts as administrator respectively:
You can start/stop the service from Windows Services Administration or execute the start/stop scripts bundled with Sonar:
Logging in to Sonar for the first time After a fresh reboot, it is finally time to log in to Sonar as an administrator.
One of the first things that you should do is change the administrator's credentials.
Sonar, by default, creates an Administrator account with username admin and password admin.
At the top right of the dashboard, click on the Log in link and fill in the form with username as admin and password as admin.
To change the default password, click on the Administrator link on top and then on My Profile on the left.
Fill in the Change Password form and click on the Change Password button to save the changes:
Securing your Sonar instance In an enterprise environment, a good practice would be to limit access to administration settings and project analysis data according to different members' responsibilities.
Administrators should have access to everything, project managers and developers to projects they belong to, while public users could be further limited by preventing them from browsing source code.
Apart from Sonar's standard authentication mechanism, delegation to third-party systems is possible with the use of plugins.
If a configured Active Directory or Atlassian's JIRA Crowd Single Sign On solution is already available, you might be interested in the following plugins, which leverage authentication functionality of the aforementioned systems:
Sonar authentication and sources visibility First of all, you have to configure the level of security for your Sonar instance.
From now on, each time a user browses to http://localhost:9000, he/she will be prompted to fill in his/her credentials in order to gain access to the instance.
To allow a new user to sign up, simply set the Allow users to sign up online property to true.
Signed up users will be automatically added to the default sonar-users group.
You can specify another group by filling in the Default user group property.
Finally, you have to take the visibility of the source code into consideration.
To prevent source code from getting displayed, set the Import sources property to false.
You can later assign the special Code viewers role to allow specific groups or users to browse and view source code.
Creating users and groups Log in as Administrator and click on the Users link, located under SECURITY, to get an overview of existing users.
From here you can edit, delete, or add a new user.
Browse to the Groups management screen and create a new group named packt-group.
Users belonging to this group will be granted access to the code presented in this book.
Now, the user list will be repopulated, including the new user:
From the Groups column, click on select to add packt-group to the user's groups and save.
Managing project roles Sonar manages security at four standard levels as shown under Configuration | SECURITY:
Global Roles include one default Administrator role that grants a user every administrative right that has to do with the configuration and personalization of the instance.
As a global administrator, you may configure every aspect of the instance, but you may not access some projects depending on their configuration.
Every project in Sonar is attached with a set of these three roles and different user groups can be assigned to each one.
For example, if there are two teams, A and B, working on separate projects, you could create two groups, group-a and group-b, and assign them to roles on their corresponding projects.
Backing up your data It is crucial for the administrator to prepare a back up and restore plan in case of data loss or corruption.
Sonar offers a backup and restore solution for its configuration data, but filesystem and database backups have to be taken care of manually, by the system's administrator.
Sonar instance configuration backup Log in to Sonar as administrator, click on the Configuration link on the top of the dashboard, and then click on Backup from the left-hand side menu under the SYSTEM options.
Click on the Backup button to download the instance's configuration in XML format.
Restore the downloaded XML file in another Sonar instance to duplicate the configuration of a previous install.
Filesystem backup At filesystem level, keep a backup of the $SONAR_HOME directory at frequent intervals.
This can be automated via cron jobs on Linux or by using Windows Backup on Windows.
For more sophisticated backup solutions, have a look at Wikipedia's comprehensive list of backup software at http://en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/List_of_backup_software, either free or proprietary, for various operating systems.
Backing up the MySQL sonar database Backup and restore on MySQL is done with the mysqldump and mysqlimport command-line tools respectively:
To create the sonar database, open a terminal or get a command prompt if you are on Windows, and enter the following command:
To restore an existing sonar database, import the sonar-backup.sql file by entering the following command:
When executing the preceding commands, enter your MySQL's administrator password when prompted.
Exercise caution, especially with the import command, as it can overwrite existing schemas.
Extending Sonar with plugins Sonar features a very streamlined plugin installation process from within the platform's web update center—although a server restart is still mandatory.
In short, this plugin calculates and reports on total duplicated lines inside a Java project.
After installation, a new Useless Code widget will be available for customizing the Sonar dashboard.
To manage plugins, log in to Sonar as administrator and click on the Update Center link under the SYSTEM section.
The Update Center section provides plugins and system information separated on the following four tabs:
Plugin Updates: List of plugins that need updating •	 System Updates: Information on new platform updates.
Click on the plugin's name to expand a nested panel containing detailed information about the plugin such as Author, License, Links, and Version:
Click on the Install button to initiate the installation process.
When the installation has been completed, you will be prompted to restart the Sonar server in order to pick up the new plugin.
In Linux, stop the server by entering the following command:
To verify if the plugin is installed correctly, log in again and browse to the Installed Plugins screen from the Update Center section:
If everything works as expected, you will notice a new entry under Plugins featuring the newly installed plugin.
To uninstall a plugin, simply click on its name to expand a details panel and then click on the Uninstall button.
Uninstallation and plugin updates both require a restart of the Sonar server.
Upgrading Sonar from the Update Center section To check if a new version of the platform has been released, visit the Update Center section and select the System Updates tab.
If there is a new version available, an information panel with release information and installation details appears similar to the one depicted in the following screenshot:
Checking  compatibility of plugins It is possible for some plugins to require an update before upgrading to the new Sonar version or to be rendered obsolete and uninstalled.
The How to upgrade section under the System Updates tab lists these plugins which should all be updated or uninstalled before proceeding with the platform's upgrade.
After updating/uninstalling said plugins, stop the Sonar server or the Sonar service, if you are in Windows:
Upgrading to latest Sonar version Next, download the new Sonar version and unzip it in a new separate directory, let's say $NEW_SONAR_HOME.
Before proceeding, make sure that the Sonar server is stopped and back up both the Sonar server and the MySQL database as described earlier in this chapter.
If Sonar is deployed inside a J2EE Application Server, build the Sonar web application by executing the following script and deploy the generated war file to the application server:
If you are in Windows, start the Sonar service from Windows services.
In Linux, start the new server instance by using the following command:
Completing the upgrade process For the upgrade process to complete, it is necessary to perform an analysis on one of your projects.
Summary In this chapter, we went through the installation process of the Sonar platform, configured a MySQL database to store Sonar data, and made a backup of our new instance.
To meet the needs of an enterprise development environment, we further secured our instance, limited access to configuration and system settings, and created sample groups and users.
Finally, we focused on maintenance tasks such as installing plugins and updating the platform by using Sonar's Update Center.
In the next chapter, we will put our fresh instance to the test by analyzing projects with all available methods, customize the Sonar dashboard, and configure its widgets and interface components.
Analyzing your First Project In this chapter, we will go through the process of analyzing a project, using all three methods that Sonar offers.
We will take a closer look at the parameterization of each method and ways to run it.
Having analyzed a project, it is time to get familiar with the dashboard.
So next, we will browse to the dashboard, configure it to our liking, and manage all the available widgets that come with the default Sonar installation.
Then, we will look at all the widgets and the insight they provide in greater detail.
Knowing how to set up an analysis and configure the dashboard, it is time to feed Sonar with some more projects to analyze.
Having populated the dashboard with a handful of projects, a reorganization of the view is in order.
Finally, we will eliminate some common violations and apply a version change to one of our projects by triggering a Sonar event during the next analysis.
The Sonar Time Machine component tracks and shows these events along with other information about the project's lifetime.
The commons-lang Apache library will serve as the first test project to be imported into the Sonar platform.
Alternatively, if you are using a source code repository system such as Subversion, you can check out the source code with the following svn command:
If the repository has been relocated, browse to http://commons.apache.org/lang/ source-repository.html.
Using a Java runner Project analysis via java-runner is ideal for quick one-offs, especially for projects that are not under constant development, and continuous inspection of quality is not a requirement.
A scenario would be to fire the procedure once, assess the results, and then decide whether the project will be put under deeper monitoring followed by a new development cycle.
While this method is ideal for quick one-off code auditions, it is not recommended in the long run, because it does not take any unit tests into account and does not integrate well in team environments.
Consider java-runner as a supplement and not the core method of the platform.
Configuring the runner First download the Sonar java-runner plugin from http://repository.
Do not unzip it within Sonar's plugins directory, because it will be detected as a plugin by the server, and the server will throw an exception.
We will refer back to the plugin's installation directory with the $SONAR_RUNNER_HOME system variable.
Next open the $SONAR_RUNNER_HOME/conf/sonar-runner.properties file and edit the Default Sonar Server and MySQL sections as follows:
To verify this, execute the java-runner command with the -h switch to display basic usage information—the command is the same for Windows:
Setting up a Sonar server for remote connections Before moving on, it is vital to ensure that if the client machine from which the runner will execute, can connect to the remote Sonar server and the hosted MySQL instance.
This has to be ensured in order to post analysis results back to the Sonar server and persist them in the configured database.
If you are using Windows, whenever you are instructed to open a command prompt or a terminal to execute a command, run the cmd command to open a Windows terminal and continue from there.
If the telnet connection fails, ensure that the Sonar server is up and running, and that no firewall is blocking incoming connections at port 9000
To test MySQL connectivity, enter the following command, filling in sonar as the password when prompted:
If MySql is installed on the same machine, you can alternatively enter the following command:
If a connection is established, the mysql> command prompt should appear ready to accept user input.
We are now ready to configure and start java-runner from the client machine.
If the connection is refused, read on on how to set up MySQL properly in order to accept remote connections.
First, you have to locate the my.cnf MySQL configuration file, which resides inside MySQL's installation directory.
On Linux systems, this file is usually under the /etc/mysq/ directory.
Open the file with the command, or use the editor of your choice to edit the file:
Then, with Ctrl + W, search for the bind keyword until you locate the following line:
Next, connect to MySQL and grant privileges to the client machine from where the java-runner will run:
Finally, edit the /etc/hosts file and add the client's IP address and hostname as follows:
Configuring the project So far we have configured the java-runner, and the Sonar server is now ready to accept incoming projects.
The final step of the process is to create a configuration file for the commons-lang project.
Notice that every project up for analysis requires its own configuration file located under its base directory and specifically named after sonar-project.properties.
The following snippet is a version of the file broken up into four sections and edited for the commons-lang project.
The $COMMONS_LANG variable is the project's base directory and you will have to substitute it with a real filesystem location:
Only path to JAR file # and path to directory of classes are supported.
The value of the property must be the key of the language.
It's mandatory to use forward slashes (/), even in Windows, wherever you enter path names in configuration files.
The preceding snippet has been broken into the following sections:
Section 1: required metadata: This section provides basic information about the project.
Changing the version number and rerunning the analysis triggers an event, which is shown on the dashboard and the Time Machine.
Section 2: project directories: Fill in paths for source, test, and classes directories in this section.
Although the test path is valid, the runner never runs them.
Section 3: Java and libraries settings: In this section, enter paths to the library dependencies, if any.
Section 4: Advanced parameters: For non-Java projects, uncomment and set the sonar.language property.
Some valid settings would be php, js, and even cobol.
Moreover, with the sonar.profile property, you can overload the default server's setting and specify another profile for the project at hand.
Analysis with the Sonar Maven plugin Maven is a build system tool allowing developers and teams to build their projects in a uniform way.
It is based on a common Project Object Model standardizing the structure of Java projects.
Build settings, plugins, and library dependencies, all stored in a single pom.xml configuration file—the core of the Maven build system.
The mechanism of the Maven build system follows the notion of goals.
For example, if you want to compile a project, you run Maven's mvn command with the compile goal as a parameter.
Similarly, the mvn test command will compile and execute the project's unit tests, while mvn package builds go through the whole process from compiling and executing unit tests to packaging your final application.
Its elegant build model enables extensions and plugins for every need and purpose.
The Sonar Maven plugin adds the sonar goal, which triggers project analysis.
To install Maven on Windows, follow the same steps by adding the MAVEN_HOME environment variable:
Simply navigate to a Maven project's directory and run these commands from there.
Configuring the Sonar Maven plugin The Sonar Maven plugin adds the following two new goals:
To activate the plugin, you will have to edit the settings.xml Maven configuration file located at $MAVEN_HOME/conf/settings.xml.
Locate the <profiles> section and a new profile entry for the sonar goal as shown in the following snippet:
The new profile is identified by its unique id element named sonar.
The properties define MySQL connection settings and the URL of the Sonar server.
Memory size If your machine runs out of memory, you can increase the Java heap memory size by using the MAVEN_OPTS environment variable as follows:
The Sonar Maven goal is now activated and can be run by using the following command:
Remember to navigate to the project's root directory, that is, where the pom.xml file resides for all Maven projects, before executing the command, and that the Sonar server is running.
If you wish to read more about the plugin, you can always visit the official website at http://mojo.codehaus.org/sonar-maven-plugin/
Apart from Sonar, numerous Maven plugins offer different functionalities and useful additions for every taste and need, such as:
Performing the analysis To perform a Sonar analysis for the commons-lang project, open a terminal, change directory to $COMMONS_LANG, and run mvn sonar:sonar.
Here is some sample output from the console during the analysis to get a better idea of the process (the whole procedure should last for a couple of minutes):
Notice that Maven goes through the package goal first, executing tests and producing a new build, followed by sonar analysis.
After the analysis has been finished, the project is added to the web dashboard at http://localhost:9000
Analysis with Ant Apache Ant, ant in the command line, is one of the oldest Java build tools around.
Chances are you might be using it already or have switched to a more modern system such as Maven or Gradle.
To perform a Sonar analysis, you need to create a new Sonar Ant Task and define the configuration inside an ant script file.
Then, add a new Ant target referencing the sonar configured task inside your project's build script and provide path information for source, binaries, and project libraries.
Installing Ant In order to use Ant in conjunction with Sonar, the following requirements must be met:
The section of the .bashrc file declaring the ANT_HOME variable is as follows:
Finally, reload the .bashrc configuration and run ant -version to verify the installation:
We are not going to go into the details right now, all you need to know is that in Ant, we define tasks and targets pointing back to these tasks.
Task definitions contain all necessary configurations required for a task to execute while the target parameterizes the task to meet each project's needs.
For Sonar, we must first define a task with server and database connection configuration.
The target configuration section refers to the task by its URI and holds sources and binaries path configuration.
Modify the build.xml Ant script of your project and add the following section for Sonar  (the highlighted lines should be modified to match your environment):
Before running the task, make sure to build the project once so as to generate compiled classes and unit tests results.
Otherwise, they will be omitted from the Sonar analysis task.
To run the analysis, move to the project base directory and execute the following command:
Browsing the Sonar web interface Now you can add your own project to Sonar, or download open source ones to demo the platform and play with the dashboard.
Verify that the Sonar server is running, point your browser at http://localhost:9000, and log in to Sonar.
The Sonar home page represents all analyzed projects in a table list form.
Click on any table column to sort the project list or click on the leftmost star icon to make a project favorite.
This project list is essentially the default view, or filtered, configured, and defaulted by Sonar.
The following list gives a brief explanation of each column:
Name: The name of the project is defined inside the pom.xml Maven file under the <name/> element.
Lines of code (LOC): This specifies the total lines of code excluding documentation.
Rules compliance: This is a percentile aggregated value reflecting overall quality.
Build date: This specifies the date on which the analysis took place.
It displays only a time HH:MM value, if the project was analyzed today.
Links: This specifies the Maven configurable project links pointing to sources, project home site, bug tracker, and so on.
Rules Compliance Index (RCI) Sonar collects data from three different analysis engines, which evaluate different weighted code violations.
Each rule is configurable and affects quality at different levels based on its configuration.
Sonar processes the collected data and finalizes the calculation by aggregating all results into one single metric, the Rules Compliance Index.
To point out changes through time, small arrows sit next to the columns to show whether a measure has decreased or increased since the last analysis.
Additionally, you can view changes over a given period of time by selecting the desired period from the top-right drop-down list.
Differential values next to each measure will appear by showing how each measure has changed over the selected period of time:
Each tab on top of the Sonar home page browses to a different filter.
We have already detailed the Projects filter with Favorites being an identical subset of the first.
The treemap gadget To better grasp the usefulness of the treemap gadget, add a few more projects into your Sonar installation:
Download and extract each project's source, move into the base directory, and run the following two commands to build and perform sonar analysis:
When the goals have been completed, browse to the Sonar home page to view the new analyzed projects and click on the second Treemap tab.
The treemap displays information at project level, drilling down to package and class level.
The size and color of the boxes are project-sensitive measures and qualities.
Simply select a measure from the corresponding drop-down lists and watch the treemap adapting to the new values.
In the following map, the size of the boxes is proportional to the total lines of code while the color's green hue is proportional to test coverage.
Large boxes mean more lines of code, while greener boxes interpret to a higher test coverage percentage.
The color levels range in the following scale from worst to best:
The treemap gadget is not a static component; on the contrary, its generic design allows visualization of different resources.
As a matter of fact, you can treemap at project, package, and even at class level.
Filtering your projects To manage filters, you have to log in to Sonar as an administrator.
Now, on the top-right section, the filters management hotbar becomes available.
Next, create a new filter including only the Apache Commons projects, leaving out Enforcer and any other projects that you own.
Select Add filter to navigate to the filter configuration settings screen:
Fill in the Name field with the value Apache Commons.
This will be the name of the filter and the tab's title.
Check the Shared checkbox, if you wish to make it available to everyone, or leave it unchecked to keep it private.
Next, in the Search for section, verify that the Projects checkbox is checked and click on the Advanced Search link at the bottom to open up additional filtering settings.
From here, you can filter resources such as projects, packages, classes, and static files by name.
Now, at the bottom of the Display panel, only the four Apache Commons projects appear.
From here, you can select how the projects will be rendered, either as a Table or with the Treemap component.
Add new metric columns and select the Default sorted column.
When you are happy with the settings, click on Save & Close to save the filter.
Then notice how it is added next to the Favorites tab.
Use the column controls to rearrange columns or remove them from the list.
In the example screen, the Build Date column was removed, and the Public documented API (%) column was added with its order altered and bringing it forward immediately after Lines of code.
The "What Coverage?" filter Having learned the basics of filter management, it is time to create a metrics-oriented filter focusing on Test Coverage.
We want a view with all complex class files regardless of the projects they belong to and lack in unit tests.
Again, navigate to the filter configuration settings by following the Add filter link on the right.
Name the filter as What Coverage? and check only the Files/Classes checkbox.
For the second one select Complexity with a Value Greater than 100.0—we are looking for really complex classes here.
Finally, click on Save & Preview to move on to the Display settings.
Select the Treemap radio button to have the classes rendered by the treemap gadget.
We want complex and untested classes appearing as large and red boxes.
To achieve this effect, select Complexity from the drop-down list for Size and Coverage for Color.
Click on Change to view the final result and Save & Close to save the filter:
Each box inside the treemap represents a complex and untested class.
Mouse over the boxes to get the exact complexity and coverage values.
To drill down to the source code, click on any box and a new window pops up presenting the file's source code.
As you can see, large red boxes are fairly complex classes with minimum test coverage and they require attention.
Sonar components— an overview Clicking on a project's name from the home page gets you to the project's dashboard.
The default configuration consists of a two-column layout with the basic widgets.
The menu on the left is split into two sections—project navigation and configuration.
Configuration settings and dashboard/widgets management are available to project administrators only.
Before we go into dashboard details, let's have a quick look at the available components starting with the top left:
Dashboard: Every project's entry point •	 Components: Drill down one level, for example, from project to package.
Dashboard This is the default view when you browse into a project.
It is fully configurable and enables you to create customized dashboards suited to your needs.
For instance, you can change the layout from a single column up to a three-columns layout; rearrange, add, or remove widgets limiting information or extending it; and of course, you can preserve these changes to a new custom dashboard leaving the default as it is.
Every new dashboard you create or share with other users will appear immediately under the default one on the left menu:
Components The components view drills down one level to project level.
For example, when viewing a Java project's dashboard by clicking on a component, Sonar drills down to of the components view.
Then, below the project, a data table breaks down all project data table.
Besides the data table, the packages are also visualized via the treemap gadget.
Click on the treemap to drill down further to a class-level dashboard.
Violations drilldown The Violations Drilldown component acts as an indexer, displaying all project violations sorted from different perspectives.
The component features four different sections—two at the top and two at the bottom.
The top left-panel provides an overview of violation totals by Severity from Blocked down to the less significant Info.
On the top-right, the actual violations appear ordered again by Severity.
The counter next to each violation represents how many times it was encountered in the source code.
Clicking on Severity or a specific violation causes the component to filter and refresh the presented data.
For example, if you click on Major, only major violations and their totals will appear.
The filter also applies to the bottom section showing only packages and classes with Major violations.
On the left, there are packages and violation totals per package, while the right section lists classes sorted by violation count.
Select any package and the right panel will refresh to present its violated classes.
Select a class and the source code viewer component will render a highlighted version of the file's source right below.
Try it and see for yourself, how the source viewer is clever enough to precisely highlight the lines that have violations.
Moreover, along with the highlight at line level, Sonar offers additional advice on what caused the violation and some common methods on how to fix it.
Finally, you can adjust the view to represent violation for a given period of time by selecting the appropriate period from the Time changes drop-down list at the top:
Time Machine The Sonar Time Machine is one of the most valuable and interesting components in the Sonar family.
Data metrics are useful, but they are isolated from a project's lifetime as they hold little information in the long run.
What matters the most is the evolution of code and how the seven axes of quality are affected during the development period in accordance to team size, implemented features, project requirements, and working man hours.
As SonarSource.com puts it, "replaying the past" is an essential key feature, which enables the manager to observe development progress in time, and drive  resources with increased efficiency.
For example, suppose evaluation of a Sonar analysis of your new project reveals a fair amount of uncovered and untested complex code.
There were some minor gaps here and there, but basically at all milestones coverage was above a healthy 75 percent.
So, the team used to respect and treat complexity with care.
A thorough investigation reveals that team composition has changed and the i-write-tests developer has been moved to the Q&A department.
Metrics are created from code, but the code is written by people.
The Time Machine connects numbers and measures to real life development matters such as project requirements, team composition, development trends, and management.
The following screenshot depicts the Time Machine component in detail.
By default, the component focuses on historical data about Complexity, Coverage, and Rules compliance.
Below the component sits the measurements list from which you can select the metrics you need.
All measures are indexed by topics such as Documentation, Rules, and Duplication among others.
Click on the Compare on chart button at the bottom of the page to refresh the Time Machine and display the evolution of your selected metrics.
If you are logged in as an administrator, click on the Set as default link to save your preferences as defaults for the component.
Major project events such as version and quality profile changes are displayed on top of the chart.
You can hide or select specific events from the drop-down list.
Only dates on which an analysis was performed will be active though.
Clouds Clouds is an extremely informational component that allows identifying dangerous classes at a glance.
Make your selections from the drop-down list and the radio buttons, and the Cloud will re-render instantly.
These are the options that you can select from the Color section:
Coverage: Color is more red when Coverage is lacking •	 Rules Compliance: Color is more red when violations increase.
Quick wins: Tag font size is proportional to lines of code •	 Top Risk: Tag font size is proportional to complexity.
Click on any class to view its source code inside the Sonar source viewer.
The code is highlighted accordingly, based on the selected measure:
Design Usually, warnings in the design department tend to be the most serious and difficult to resolve.
A dependency cycle occurs when Class A constructs or calls a method of Class B and vice versa.
It is a basic hierarchy problem, which if left unmanaged ends up with non-modularized code that cannot be re-used.
Lack of cohesion and unneeded coupling is a tight knot to solve, especially if it reaches Gordian levels.
Refer to the component often, and cut dependencies early before they accumulate.
Select a row to highlight the matrix according to incoming and outgoing dependencies.
Cycling dependencies are identified by the red highlighted values inside the matrix.
Select the highlighted dependency numbers to view the dependency relationships of the java classes at the bottom of the component.
Hotspots The Hotspots component collects and sorts violation totals and measures.
Essentially, it is a collection of the top five listed widgets with each widget focusing on a different axis of quality.
The Hotspots lists help illuminate where to start fixing things cost-wise.
You can use the filter at the top of the page to search for a specific library or click on the Usages link to view projects that use the selected library.
Anatomy of the dashboard The Sonar dashboard is the entry point for every project.
The default two-column layout hosts numerous widgets that describe quality and give you insight on different metrics.
The top two widgets provide statistics on code size and violation totals by severity.
Accessors methods Accessors are all getter methods that follow the standard JavaBean pattern.
Such methods expose private objects' method is an accessor to the the private string message property.
The higher the accessor count, the more open an API is.
Selecting a severity from the violations summary on the right, browse to the violations drill-down component already filtered by the selected level.
The next group of widgets displays general information about Documentation, Design, and Complexity.
Select any measurement in the Comments or Duplications sections to open the resource viewer and identify the undocumented and duplicated lines of code.
The dependencies widget is an overview of dependencies and package cycling.
Click on a measurement to navigate to the Design component.
On the second row on the left, the Complexity widget breaks down the complexity at package, class, and method level.
Click on a value to drill down to classes ordered in a descending order by complexity—method or class total.
A healthy distribution for methods would be to have a few complex methods and many simpler ones, while for classes a linear to average distribution seems more normal.
Through the book, we will thoroughly discuss and utilize the object-oriented LCOM4 and Response for class (RFC) metrics, which govern architecture and design.
LCOM4 is one of the four variations in the Lack of cohesion methods (LCOM) family.
The code coverage widget displays unit test statistics over successes, failures, and duration.
Click on the coverage links to inspect classes that lack testing.
Then, select any class to have the resource viewer highlight untested lines and branches.
The event widget highlights events during the lifetime of the project.
Version and quality profile changes are automatically registered by Sonar, but you can also add manual project events by clicking on the Add an event link at the bottom of the widget.
Fill in the form with the event's details by giving it a name and description, and click on Create to save it.
Layout and widget arrangement Log in as an administrator and browse any project dashboard.
Click on the Manage Dashboards link located at the top of the page to manage your dashboards.
A list with all your custom dashboards will appear allowing you to edit them, delete, or configure widgets.
To create a new dashboard, fill in the Name and Description (optional) fields inside the form at the right of the page and click on the Create Dashboard link.
If you want to share the dashboard with other sonar users, do not forget to check the shared checkbox.
Your dashboard will be created and Sonar will prompt you to select the widgets you want it to host from a comprehensive list.
You can filter the list by clicking one of the top None, Design, History, Rules, or Tests links.
Read the available widget description and click on the Add widget link to add it to the dashboard:
Some widgets allow further parameterization by clicking on the Edit link on top of them.
For example, if you select the Timeline widget, you can edit which three metrics will be displayed.
Another useful and fully customizable widget is the Custom Measures widget.
Add it and select which metrics you want it to display.
It is possible to add two Timeline widgets tracking historical data on different aspects, for instance having two timelines tracking metrics on Complexity and Unit Testing.
Finally, click-and-drag around any widget by its header to reposition it either vertically or horizontally on a different column.
When you are done, click on the Back button to navigate to the dashboard link.
For complex projects, you could create separate dashboards entirely focused on a single aspect featuring the Overview dashboard, Coverage dashboard, and so on.
To reconfigure the widgets, click on the Configure widgets link at the top.
To change the dashboard's layout, click on the Edit layout link and select one from the available five.
Avoid the single column one because in most cases it produces dashboards that require excessive scrolling in order to view all widgets.
Eliminating your first violations Now we will pick the commons-lang project that we imported into Sonar earlier and eliminate a few violations.
Then, we'll run a new analysis and get visual feedback afterwards through the web interface.
Of course, you are free to choose any project and try to eliminate similar violations.
Before we start the process of editing source files, here is what the Violations widget reads:
Unused modifier violation From the left menu, select the Violations Drilldown component.
Select the Info severity, find the Unused Modifier violations on the right panel, and click them to see the exact classes at which they are encountered.
Sonar will find Builder.java inside the package org.apache.commons.lang3.builder and ExceptionContext.
Click on the filenames to open up the source viewer and drill down to the exact line where each violation is encountered.
Open the Builder.java file and delete the public declaration at line 88, since it will be calculated by the java compiler:
Do the same for the ExceptionContext.java interface and delete the public declaration at line 49:
Filter again by selecting the Major severity to review major violations.
Modified Order: Major violation in FormatCache.java inside the package org.apache.commons.lang3.time.
Correctness - Repeated conditional tests: Major violation in DurationFormatUtils,java in the package org.apache.commons.lang3
Modified Order violation The Modified Order violation means that a method or a variable declaration does not follow Java standards.
For example, in FormatCache.java at line 104 protected should precede abstract:
Correctness - Repeated conditional tests The Correctness - Repeated conditional tests violation means there are unnecessary conditionals that were already resolved earlier.
The Sonar source viewer highlights the source file at line 327 by highlighting the conditional:
We can safely remove the check and reduce the complexity of the if conditional.
Having eliminated the violations, we are ready to apply a version change to the project.
Sonar will catch the change and trigger a version change event, which will appear in the Time Machine component.
Of course, in a real case scenario such edits would not justify a version change but would be incorporated in the same SNAPSHOT build.
Creating your first analysis event Locate and edit the pom.xml file inside the $COMMONS_LANG directory.
In the beginning of the file, find the following line:
Then, repackage the project and execute a Sonar analysis with:
Getting visual feedback When the analysis is complete, visit the commons-lang dashboard to review changes.
Select the previous analysis from the drop-down list at the top of the dashboard to display the difference between the current and the previous analysis.
Additionally, the version change now appears at the top of the Events widget as the latest event.
This event will now appear on all historical Sonar components.
What was not planned was the minor drop of complexity per file by 0.1 percent.
This is the most rewarding part of the whole process.
Summary In this chapter, we covered all three methods that the Sonar platform offers to analyze projects such as Maven, Ant, and Java Runners.
We configured the Sonar server and its MySQL database to accept remote connections, and installed and configured the Maven and Ant build tools.
With some projects already analyzed, we went through the Sonar web interface from the home page, down to components and project dashboard.
We created a custom filter to help us track lack of test coverage across all projects and further customized the dashboard by adding widgets and rearranging the layout.
Towards the end of the chapter, we eliminated a couple of violations and triggered a version change event.
After a fresh analysis, we browsed to Sonar again to get visual feedback on the aforementioned changes.
In the next chapter, we will focus on coding standards, the rules that enforce them, and how to use Sonar to effectively track and eliminate them.
Following Coding Standards In this chapter, we will discuss coding standards and the way Sonar monitors such violations.
We will use Sonar to track down coding standards violations and correct them.
To better understand the process, a small project containing classes lacking in standards department will be inspected by Sonar.
Then, we will go over identifying and eliminating the violations one by one, examining the cause of each violation and providing a possible solution on how to eliminate it or overcome it.
To fine grain Sonar output, we will define a custom profile focused on coding standards violations.
Before diving into the whole process, a general discussion about coding standards is necessary, exploring the purpose they serve, and why projects need to follow them and respect them at one point or another.
Then, we will take a closer look at what a Sonar Rule is, how it correlates to Violations and Levels, and the Rules Compliance Metric.
Under certain circumstances, some rules may not apply, triggering false positives.
We will explore a couple of false positive cases and disable some rules not be taken into account by Sonar when aggregating results to produce the Rules Compliance measure.
In other words, such rules should not affect project quality at all.
A brief overview of coding standards and conventions •	 Sonar profiles, rules, and violations.
Inspecting violations with the radiator component •	 Watching the quality improving.
A brief overview of coding standards and conventions Coding standards are defined by sets of rules governing programming style for a particular programming language.
Although they differ from language to language, the objective is the same—to provide consistent, clean, readable code.
Of course, development teams have different requirements and develop their own rule sets customized to their own preferences and programming habits.
However, while the coding standards matter is subjective, the goal remains the same and many common rules apply to all projects among different programming languages.
They matured through time, following programming languages' evolution and needs.
Each language features its own standards and idioms, growing and being revised along with the language.
Standards and conventions do not touch how features are designed or implemented but how they are presented to the coder.
Clean-cut code often means error-free code because information and structure is more apparent to the developer.
Badly written/structured code, apart from slowing the development process, discourages new developers who have to not only fight and comprehend a wall of lines and random notations but to add to this mess their own.
Provide them with tight and clean code and watch them easily adjust and improve.
Following coding conventions through your project's code base should not be considered as an add-on or a luxury.
Follow some common guidelines and development will become more pleasant and effective.
Software, during its lifetime, is not maintained by the original author.
In other words, from the moment your software project starts following some standards and common conventions, it will gradually become immune to nonstandard writings, since most developers tend to respect other peoples' sources and try to provide quality at the same levels.
Moreover, coding conventions enable a more accurate static analysis of the code for reasons other than compiling.
For example, counting the number of lines/statements or generating source code documentation, either with the javadoc tool or third-party software such as Doxygen, available at http://www.stack.nl/~dimitri/doxygen/
Java standards Java features a thorough set of standards across its specification covering organization and presentation aspects:
Sonar platform integrates rules covering all of the preceding areas.
The default Sonar Way profile does include Java standards rules but for a more comprehensive inspection, Sonar Way with Findbugs is recommended.
Sonar uses three separate source code analyzers, all of which feature rules on coding standards.
However, Checkstyle is dedicated to standards' inspection, covering almost everything from common rules to right curls indentation and parameters padding.
Next, we will learn how to manage Sonar Quality Profiles and create a new one covering coding standards issues and examine how Sonar rules are defined and configured.
Knowing how Sonar rules work enables us to create very specialized quality profiles, which in turn act as filters on quality axes.
Sonar profiles, rules, and violations Sonar validates source code against a quality profile.
Based on profile settings, the source code analyzers take turns parsing code and apply numerous rules.
When a rule is broken, a violation is created, but what is a rule and how does it correlate to the overall quality?
Think of these rules as constraints to your source code.
Each time Sonar parses, your code checks whether a rule is followed or not.
In case the rule's criteria are not met, a new violation is created at a predefined Severity.
The severity or level of the violation is a weighted value that affects overall quality of the Rules Compliance Index (RCI)
The Rules Compliance Index We have already talked about the RCI and now it is time to take a closer look at how it is calculated in practice.
Sonar features a total of five different Severity Levels with their respective multiplier values:
For example, four violations of Minor severity would produce a total Violations' value of 8 based on the following formula:
Now assume a project of 15,000 lines with the following violation to severity levels distribution:
As you might have guessed the RCI value equals to:
This is the total quality of the project at a nice high of 85.56 percent.
A lot of thought has been put into severity levels and their respective values in order to produce accurate and representative results.
Obviously, it is more efficient to spend time and energy eliminating high-level violations, which have the most impact on quality.
Managing quality profiles Sonar comes with three predefined profiles—they are not editable but you can use them as a basis for a new custom one.
Go to Configuration from the top of the page and then click Quality Profiles on the left.
You can select the default quality profile, copy an existing one and use it as a template for a custom profile, or create a new one from scratch.
Creating a profile Throughout the book, we will create a new Packt profile from scratch, adding rules chapter by chapter.
By the end of the book, you will have configured a complete professional profile and have a deep understanding of the most common and or create numerous profiles customized down to the finest detail.
To create a new quality profile, click the Create link from the main profile management screen.
Sonar will prompt for a profile Name; name it under Packt profile and click on the Create Java Profile button to save it.
Notice that the Sonar platform allows profile inheritance, minimizing profile management and modification.
Inherit from a base profile and modify according to your needs.
Associating projects to profiles Click on a profile's Name and then the Projects tab to view a list of associated projects with that profile.
From here, you can specifically associate a project to the selected profile, otherwise unassociated projects will be analyzed by the default one.
Managing rules Click on Packt profile from the profile management screen to browse to the main configuration screen.
Currently, the profile is empty, thus not containing any rules.
The Coding Rules tab section features three list boxes from which you can filter rules by Analyzer Plugin, severity level, and whether the rule is activated or not.
Plugin: Select one of the available Sonar analyzers •	 Severity filter rules by severity level (Info, Minor, Major, Critical, Blocker)
Select active, inactive, or all rules the current plugin analyzer supports.
For now, select any rules of minor severity for the Checkstyle plugin and click on the Search button.
Wait for the page to refresh and a complete list of all Checkstyle rules will render.
All rules are currently deactivated and checkboxes on the left are deselected.
Adding a rule To add the rule to the profile, simply check the Ajax checkbox on the left.
There is no need to do anything more and the rule has been added.
From the top right of the rules list you can Bulk Change rules by either activating or de-activating them all at once.
Clicking on the rule's name opens up a configuration panel.
Configuring a rule Now scroll down the list and locate the Constant Name Rule.
Add it to the profile and click on its name to review the configuration settings:
You can select the desired level from the drop-down menu on the left and the format of the rule.
Each rule's implementation logic uses these predetermined token values or regular expressions to decide whether to raise a violation or not at the given severity level, thus raising the total severity cost.
Regular expressions The evaluation expression for the Constant Name rule reads:
This means that constant names should start with a letter and consist only of uppercase letters and numbers with words separated by an underscore, for example:
If we want to raise a violation when a constant name contains a number, we would alter the preceding expression as follows:
Boolean expressions Expand the Checkstyle Member name rule to view its configuration panel.
The regular expression checks the field's name against Java standards and the Boolean expressions control to what extent the rule will apply (private, protected, public members, and so on)
Token and value-based rules The Line Length rule (Checkstyle: Major) checks for the maximum length and registers a violation if it is exceeded.
However, it can be configured to your liking by adjusting the maximum line length, the number of expanded spaces for tab characters, and an optional ignore expression pattern.
Lines that match this pattern will be ignored no matter how long they are.
Review your IDE settings and make sure that the maximum line length is in sync with the Line Length rule.
Backing up and restoring profiles To transfer or share quality profile configurations among different Sonar instances, you can Backup a source configuration in XML format and restore it to any target instance by clicking on the Restore link from the profile management screen.
Select the XML source configuration file exported earlier and click on Restore profile to upload the file.
Sonar will parse the XML and create a new identical profile.
If a profile with the same name already exists, delete it before restoring.
To back up a profile to XML, click on the Backup button.
From the same screen, it is possible to compare two different profiles and get an overview on how much they differ in respect to rules composition.
Creating a coding standards profile To create a coding standards profile, it is necessary to know the responsibilities and specialization of each code analyzer, along with the rules it incorporates.
There are some overlapping rules, but in general each analyzer has a separate focus.
At the time of writing, Checkstyle has 122 rules, mainly checking Java standards and conventions.
It specializes in locating vulnerable code that could lead to potential bugs or defects.
From the Coding Rules tab, you can use the Name/Key to filter your search.
For example, you can set the Name/Key value to correctness and filter all Correctness and Multithreaded Correctness rules.
Sonar's own analyzer consists of 12 rules and focuses on complexity.
One rule that is worth mentioning is the Avoid use of //NOSONAR marker rule.
Any violation to quality rule can be deactivated with the //NOSONAR marker.
This marker is pretty useful to exclude false-positive results but sometimes it can abusively be used to hide real quality flaws.
This rule allows to track and/or forbid use of this marker.
During the source code parsing process, whenever Sonar reaches a line containing an inline //NOSONAR comment, it will ignore it.
Without the //NOSONAR tag, Sonar would normally produce a violation because the if condition defaults to true.
We are going to spend this total among the most common rules on coding standards and we will follow this process for the rest of the book in order to create a fairly balanced profile equal in all aspects.
To give you an idea of how it will turn out, here is a table presenting the cost-based breakdown:
Rules have been grouped into three general categories for profile design needs:
Add the rules presented in the following sections to the Packt profile we created earlier by selecting the checkbox on the left of each rule.
Do not change the severity level, and add Avoid use of //NOSNAR marker from the Sonar analyzer.
Naming conventions and declarations rules Naming conventions and declarations rules are sorted from lower to higher severity in the following listing.
Next, we will provide some examples for some of the rules as to exactly understand how a violation is generated and what to do in order to eliminate it.
Checks that the parts of a class or interface declaration appear in the order suggested by the code convention for the Java Programming Language:
Class (static) variables: First the public class variables, next protected, then.
Instance variables: First the public class variables, next protected, then.
To better illustrate the specification, the following is an exemplary Foo class:
This structure is all you need to know in order to lay out a Java class according to the specification.
Usually, developers look at the top of the class for static and constant variables and move to the bottom to find more restricted fields and methods, moving from public down to private access.
Abstract class name In Java, abstract classes have to start with the Abstract keyword, for example AbstractResource.
The rule identifies wrongly named abstract classes using the following regular expression:
What about the Factory part? This means that abstract classes ending with the Factory keyword do not require the Abstract prefix.
So the AbstractResource and ResourceFactory class names are both valid names for abstract classes.
Variable, parameter, and method names All variables except constants, parameters, and methods follow a simple rule.
The first letter is in lower case, words inside a declaration start with an uppercase letter:
Sonar checks this naming convention with the following regular expression:
Constant names Remember that constant names are all uppercase letters and words are separated with an underscore, for example FOO or FOO_BAR.
Multiple variable declarations This rule ensures that each variable is declared in its own statement and on its own line.
Some developers have the habit of declaring many variables in one statement at once but this degrades readability.
Local home naming Local session EJB interfaces extending the javax.ejb.EJBLocalHome interface should be suffixed by the LocalHome keyword as follows:
Variable lengths The Long Variable and Short Variable rules detect the length of a variable or a parameter and report accordingly.
If a variable's length is less than three or greater than 17, then a violation is registered.
The Naming - Short method name is similar but applies to method names.
Naming - Avoid field name matching method name Similar names for methods and variables prove to be confusing.
Naming - Suspicious equals method name The equals method is very important in Java language because it is used to compare and identify equal objects.
When it is overridden, the method's signature should be identical to the inherited one; otherwise, equality will not work as expected.
A very common mistake is to declare the parameter as a String and not an object.
Sonar identifies the following method declaration assuming that the developer wanted to override the equals method:
Standards rules In this section, we will discuss the second set of rules that we are going to add to the Packt profile:
Unused imports Leaving unused imports in a class simply clutters the file.
Fortunately, modern IDEs have functions to detect and automatically remove them.
This rule triggers a violation in case some of them have been forgotten.
Unnecessary final modifier When a class is declared final, this means that inheritance is not allowed and so methods cannot be overridden in any way.
Obviously, declaring a method final is not necessary and the following code would cause a violation:
Fields in interfaces are automatically public static final, and methods are public abstract.
Classes or interfaces nested in an interface are automatically public and static (all nested interfaces are automatically static)
For historical reasons, modifiers which are implied by the context are accepted by the compiler, but are superfluous.
The meaning of this rule is that when you have to change this value, change it only in one place, where the number's variable is declared and not all over the place.
What you can do is create a static MagicNumber class and hold numbers there or declare them as constants in the class:
Declare number 20 as a FACTOR constant variable inside the FOO class.
Additionally, make it public so other classes can access it referring Foo.FACTOR:
Final class A class that has only private constructors should be declared as private because the.
Missing constructor This rule checks that classes (except abstract ones) define a constructor and don't rely on the default one.
Abstract class without any methods If a class does not contain any methods, thus not providing functionality but only members, it is probable that it plays the role of a Container.
To prevent instantiation, a private or a protected constructor should exist, as shown in the following code:
Code layout and indentation Finally, add rules that check code layout and whitespace:
Avoid inline conditionals Inline conditionals are essentially if else statements expressed in one line.
While they make efficient use of text, space prove to be difficult to read.
Has to be rewritten in its clearer full form as follows:
Checks for the placement of left curly braces for code blocks.
You can configure this rule to your liking, since the left curl placement has proved to be a very subjective matter, by selecting the appropriate policy:
Otherwise, the line is wrapped and the brace is placed at the start of a new line.
Configure your IDE to lay out braces in sync with the above configuration.
Paren Pad The Paren Pad rules check the padding of parentheses, that is, whether a space is required after a left parenthesis and before a right parenthesis.
Trailing comment A comment is trailing when it is on the same line as a statement.
This rule ensures that all comments are on separate lines.
Multiple String literals This rules checks whether a String literal occurs in multiple places within a single file.
This is a form of code duplication and renders code maintenance quite difficult.
Imagine having to replace a String literal appearing multiple times in a large file all over the place.
A better tactic is to define a constant and when a change is required, just redefine the constant.
The for loops must use braces This is same as the Inline Conditionals rule only for for loops.
Inspecting violations with the Radiator component The Radiator component is very similar to the treemap one, with three main differences:
In treemap, you only drill down one level and it redirects you to the dashboard.
Before installing the plugin, you can associate one of your projects to the coding standards profile we just created and perform a Sonar analysis.
Then you may examine your project with the Radiator component.
Installing the Radiator plugin Log in as an administrator and click on Configuration from the top and go to SYSTEM | Update Center from the left navigation menu.
Click on the Available Plugins tab and scroll to the bottom until you reach the Visualization/Reporting section.
Click install and wait for Sonar to notify you that it is ready to install the plugin and you need to restart the server for the installation process to take place.
Now, to review how your project measures in the Rules Compliance department, click on Radiator on the left of the project's dashboard.
The radiator widget The radiator can be also added directly to the project dashboard as a widget.
Click Configure Widget from the dashboard screen, locate the radiator, and click on Add Widget.
The following screen shows what JDK 7 looks like (size is for LOC and color for Rules compliance):
Mouse over a box to view the exact RCI percentage or click on it to drill down one level from project to package and so on.
SonarSource hosts the complete JDK7, so you can watch a live demonstration at http://nemo.sonarsource.org/
Drill to class level—click the box to open the source viewer.
Watch the quality improving To closely monitor how the RCI metrics fluctuate during development along with the Violations count and Lines of Code, you can add the Timeline widget to the dashboard.
Navigate to the dashboard and click on the Configure Widgets link.
If the Timeline widget is not present, select it from the upper yellowish panel by clicking on Add Widget.
Configuring the Timeline widget In edit mode, select the Edit link from the widget's header bar and name it as Coding Standards and for the three metric values select:
Click on Save and Back to the dashboard from the top to return to view mode.
Summary In this chapter, we reviewed Java coding standards and conventions, and the way Sonar applies them to your source code.
We went through the process of creating a new cost-based quality profile detailing rules configuration.
Finally, we installed the Radiator plugin from Sonar's update center and configured the Timeline widget on the project dashboard.
In the next chapter, we will discuss Sonar code reviews and how they can contribute to a project's lifecycle.
We will further explore some of the visual components Sonar offers and enable reporting capabilities.
In this chapter, we will discuss code reviews, how they are beneficial to development teams, and what the Sonar platform can do to ease the review process.
Next, we will configure the notification system to subscribe to code review events registered and raised by Sonar.
Having already detailed violations, it is time to introduce metric thresholds to better control quality and custom measures.
While calculated metrics exist in abundance within the platform, there are business measures that are not applicable in an automated process.
Custom measures help extend information and cover this aspect too.
Finally, we will continue our journey through the platform's visual components, such as the Timeline and Motion Chart, along with PDF reporting capabilities.
Reviewing code Writing code is not a monolithic procedure and is never written once.
At least a couple of revisions take place before we consider it to be final.
Of course, when a bug arises we are forced to revise and correct or improve the code but it is best to code and develop pro-actively.
Adding code reviews as an additional process before committing code helps identify problematic areas early and ensure better quality.
As a matter of fact, we could say that the Sonar platform reviews code from many perspectives, generating results over different axes.
But systematic examination and code inspection by team developers is irreplaceable.
The review process using specifically designed software is very similar to maintaining and using a bug tracking system.
Instead of bugs, developers assign and are assigned code reviews.
The point is to begin a discussion of why something is written the way it is, whether there is room for improvement, and what the alternatives are.
There will be cases where the code author has real reasons and needs to code things in a specific way, but this is not always the case.
A more experienced developer may foresee hidden bugs and dangerous cases not covered in code, requiring changes.
Code reviews do not only help to improve code and quality but educate the developers too.
Less experienced developers gain insight on good practices and techniques from their colleagues.
Additionally, it is often a good idea to let new developers review others' code straight away.
Exposing them to source code and in-house libraries early will help them integrate better with the team and adopt a similar programming style.
Finally, when developers know beforehand that their code will get reviewed, they tend to be more careful and supply better documentation in order to assist the reviewer.
The Sonar platform features code reviews management complementing the automatically calculated metrics produced by the separate analyzers; thus we have both machine and developer feedback in one single place.
Sonar manual reviews Similar to Bug Tracking systems, reviews are assigned to users and may have one of four possible statuses:
When code changes resolve, the violation referenced by the review is marked as resolved and closed automatically.
If the same violation takes place again, Sonar reopens the review again.
If you do not intend to resolve the violation or you believe it does not qualify as a violation, you can resolve it by flagging it as False-Positive.
Assigning reviews First of all, drill down to the Java class level and open the source code with Sonar Source Viewer by clicking on the class name.
You can use the treemap/radiator component to drill down to class level or browse violations from the project dashboard.
When inside the Source Viewer, click on the rightmost Violations tab to view the violated sections of the source code.
Each violation has a light blue header with the level and name.
Move your mouse over the header to make the Review and Flag as false-positive links appear.
You must be logged in and have the Users role to be able to assign reviews.
Locate the violation you want to review and click on the Review link.
Enter review details in the text area that opens and fill in the Assignee name — start typing a username and a filtered list will pop up.
When you are done, click on the Add Comment button.
You can style your comments using special wiki style notations as seen on the right under Help tips.
The review assignee is now visible and a new link appears on the right of the violation header named after Review #ID.
Click on the link for additional details such as  assignment date and original reporter—author.
Additionally, you can manually Resolve the review, flag it as False-Positive, or Reassign it to a different user.
In any case, the review will automatically resolve when the corresponding violation resolves too.
When you log in to Sonar, click on the Reviews link under Filters from the left menu to bring up the Reviews browser.
Clear the Assigned to text field and click on Search to browse all reviews.
From here, you can filter reviews by Status, Violation Severity, and of course project.
To find reviews reported by a specific user, type their name in the Created by field.
The results list, which appears below the search panel, is clickable and transfers you to a more detailed screen allowing to resolve the review or to reassign it.
You can include or exclude False-Positive reviews by making the appropriate selection from the red highlighted select menu.
Configuring notifications Sonar features an e-mail notification mechanism allowing users to subscribe to certain events.
To activate notifications, you have to supply Sonar with e-mail server configuration.
Fill in the fields with your e-mail server configuration and click on the Save Email Settings button when done.
Users can now subscribe to notifications from their profile settings.
Click on the username link located on the top bar and check the events you want to subscribe to under the Notifications section.
For example, you can subscribe to the reviews event and receive an e-mail whenever a review has been assigned or was created by you.
Defining metric thresholds and alerts To further streamline and automate quality inspection, Sonar introduces dynamic threshold alerts by assigning threshold values to specific metrics.
Whenever a metric exceeds the configured value or threshold, an alert is raised.
Alerted projects are specifically marked both in the projects list and in the dashboard to indicate the threshold violation.
Each quality profile features its own separate set of alerts.
Next, we will add two alerts to Rules compliance and Testing Coverage.
Click on Configuration, go to the Quality Profiles page, and click on the Packt profile we have already created (if you haven't created it, simply create a new one by clicking on Copy to copy the default profile, named Sonar way)
Then, click on the Alerts tab to navigate to the Alerts management screen.
Click on the Configure widgets link and add Alert widget.
Navigate to your project's directory and enter mvn sonar:sonar or ant sonar to perform a new analysis.
Next you can see how metrics that have exceeded above thresholds are highlighted in red and a notification is visible inside the dashboard.
To get rid of this irritating reminder, we have to write some more tests :)
The Build Breaker To create an even more strict development environment, you can install the Build Breaker plugin and cause the build process to fail and report as broken whenever a metric exceeds threshold values.
The plugin is available for installation from Configuration | Update Center under the section Integration.
Remember to restart the server in order to complete the installation process.
Sonar manual measures Apart from the metrics that are automatically collected during analysis, Sonar offers more flexibility by allowing us to add custom ones.
There are some factors that simply cannot be calculated or automatically aggregated, such as team size, business value, or story points of the features that are to be implemented in subsequent versions.
Nevertheless, such measures are necessary in order get the complete picture.
Log in as administrator or the packt user we have already created and go to Configuration | Manual Metrics to take a look at the following measures:
Fill in the form on the right and click on the Create button when you are finished.
What are Story Points? Planning Poker or Scrum Poker is a technique to estimate effort and time on features implementation.
Each developer assigns Story Points to features based on how complex or difficult they are to implement.
When everyone has assigned points, a discussion begins especially about features that were assigned both low and high Story Points from the team.
Finally, a consensus is reached, Story Points are decided, and the team has a better collective understanding about the features and the effort required until the next version.
The Story Points manual measure has been now created and is available to any project in Sonar.
Managing manual measures Visit the project dashboard and click on the Manual Measures link under the CONFIGURATION section.
Click on the Add Measure link located on the top right, select the Team Size and Story Points from the menu, and enter the measure's value and description respectively.
Click on Save to return to the previous screen and notice that both measures are marked with an orange box as pending.
An analysis is required before they become available to the dashboard.
Perform an analysis and browse to the dashboard to add the Manual Measures widget.
Click on the Configure Widgets link from top left, locate the Custom Measures widget, and click on Add Widget.
Click on edit from the widget's header to add the measures you want.
If the team size changes or a new set of feature demands different story points, you can always go to the Manual Measures screen and edit the values accordingly.
This is how the widget will look on the dashboard:
Quality reporting on your project Sonar offers reporting capabilities on project quality and metrics in the form of a plugin.
It aggregates project dashboard information in a presentable and readable format inside a PDF document.
To get some insight about the plugin's development, you can visit Martin's blog at http://blog.klicap.es/en/products/sonarpdfreportplugin.
Have a look at some of the more advanced features available in the commercial version of the plugin.
Sonar includes the limited but still very valuable open source version.
Installing the PDF report plugin Log in to Sonar with administrator privileges, click on Configuration and then Update Center from the left.
Navigate to the Available Plugins tab and scroll down to the Visualization/ Reporting section.
Click on Install to initiate the installation process and restart the Sonar server when it is complete to make the plugin available.
Next, from the project's dashboard, click on the Configure widgets link to add the PDF report widget to the dashboard.
Getting the project report The plugin generates a PDF report based on Sonar analysis results.
Run a Sonar analysis by executing the Sonar Maven goal and visit the dashboard afterward to browse the results and download the fresh PDF report.
The PDF Report panel in the dashboard features a Download link to the report's document.
If the report widget is empty and displays No Data, make sure that a Sonar analysis was previously executed successfully.
The reports consist of the following sections for each module in the project:
Some of the notable features in the commercial version of the reporting are:
The following are some screens of an actual PDF report.
The second section of the report breaks down and counts each violation sorted by multiplicity, as shown next:
Customizing the report To produce reports for managers, it would be better to omit violations details from the document, as they do not add any further useful information to them.
The PDF Report plugin comes with two layouts; workbook which is the default one and executive.
Click on the Save parameters button to save your changes and the next time an analysis is run, the report generated will contain only the following sections:
Getting visual feedback Sonar offers some very interesting and modern visual components to help the developer or manager understand the progress and evolution of the code base over time:
You can find the plugins in the Update Center under the Reporting/Visualization section.
Install them and do not forget do restart the Sonar server after the installation.
Finally, run a new analysis of a project and launch your browser.
It is the same component that Google uses to render trends, stock analysis, and website analytics.
You can find more information about the component at Google Code (http://code.google.com/intl/el-GR/apis/chart/interactive/docs/ gallery/annotatedtimeline.html)
To use the Timeline plugin, click on the Timeline link from the left menu when browsing the project dashboard.
The component renders an interactive time-series chart featuring data on three default metrics: Coverage, Rules Compliance, and Lines Of Code.
You can change the time scale from one day to one year or more.
You can trace the lines with your mouse and review exact point values at the top left.
Project events are also flagged on the chart, so you can see when each event took place.
The legend on the left of the chart reads all project events since the first analysis.
Let us zoom the previous screen to better understand what the timeline actually shows and what we can learn about the project.
The timeline focuses on the middle five months of development.
Lines of code have been greatly reduced and stabilized (refactoring) and the source code continuously improves in an effort to follow standards and conventions.
The same goes for code coverage, although the major drop during the second month probably requires attention.
We can change the metrics from the select menus on the top left to cover architecture and complexity or any other aspect you desire.
Complexity has almost dropped to half as a result of refactoring while Critical Violations have been kept at a minimum.
So we learn that the project has greatly improved in terms of source code size and complexity.
There is room for improvement though in the testing and coverage department.
Motion Chart plugin The Motion Chart plugin is the most impressive plugin available for the platform.
It generates an animation of bubbles inside the chart, with each bubble representing a project module.
Size and bubble color can be parameterized from a plethora of available metrics.
The chart is available from the Motion Chart link on the left menu when browsing the project dashboard.
It also offers two more renditions, such as bar chart and line chart.
Bubble chart The following screen shows the bubble chart in action.
Check the Trails checkbox to cause the bubbles to leave a trail while the animation plays.
To start the animation, just click on the play button on the bottom left of the chart.
You can adjust the Period of the chart from the select menu on the top left in a range of one month up to two years.
Uncheck the Components checkbox to view the project as one single bubble, leave it checked to break it down into its modules—components.
Complexity (Size): Particle size is proportional to package complexity •	 Lines of code (X axis): Total number of effective LOCs in the package.
For greater effect, you can use the Color drop-down menu at the top right and map it to an additional metric.
Bar chart Click on the second bar icon at the top right to switch to the Bar Chart mode and click on play to start the animation.
Each bar or project module raises or lowers respectively to the metric it represents.
The bars are sorted by a defined metric value too, and you can change this value from the menu on the bottom right.
For example in the following screenshot, the bars are sorted by Lines of code in descending order:
Summary In this chapter, we went through the code review process using the Sonar platform.
We configured the mail server to enable users subscribe to review events and receive e-mail, and created thresholds on Coverage and Rules Compliance metrics.
Then, we covered custom measures and how we can use them to introduce new metrics into the system.
We created the Story Points custom measure and added the appropriate widget to our project's dashboard.
We detailed all three components and learned how to read and interpret the information they provide.
In the next chapter, we will discuss violations that relate to potential bugs and how best to eliminate them.
We will use Sonar components to drill down to classes and filter such violations in an effort to spot them and eliminate them.
The Sonar Source Viewer will prove to be an invaluable tool of great assistance and efficiency.
We will use some practical examples of violated code and provide possible solutions to such violations.
Hunting Potential Bugs In this chapter, we will review and detail some of the most common violations that can lead to bugs or defects—unexpected behavior.
We will then add coding standards rules to complement the custom profile.
Next, we will install the Violation Density plugin, an alternate overall representation of project quality.
Finally, we will install the Sonar Eclipse plugin, an ultimate tool that brings Sonar measures directly to our IDE.
Potential bugs violations The three Sonar analyzers feature an extensive set of rules checking code that can lead to potential bugs and deficiencies.
We are going to add to the custom Packt profile some of the most common and important rules.
So far, we have added rules for Coding Standards costing a total of 100 points.
For potential bugs, we will add rules to reach the target value of 200, as it is the most important part along with complexity.
For example, adding five Critical checks would raise the value of the profile to 15
The following table breaks down the rules we will use sorted by level.
Most of these checks are implemented by the Findbugs analysis engine.
We tried to include important rules from all analyzers, avoiding overlapping and similar checks.
We can split the rules into the following three general categories:
Next, we will present the rules in table form and further detail those that need some clarification.
Log in to Sonar and add the rules to the Packt profile as you read.
Feel free to change the severity of some rules to fit it to your needs.
Dodgy code rules The following table shows the total 33 rules that cover dodgy code potentially leading to bugs and unexpected behavior.
Some of the checks identify code that will surely break while others suggest a rewrite to provide clarity and performance.
Major Consider returning a zero length array rather than null.
Major Method ignores return value Findbugs Major Usage of GetResource may be unsafe if class.
Critical Method does not release lock on all paths Findbugs Critical Code contains a hard coded reference to an.
Critical Invalid syntax for regular expression Findbugs Critical Null pointer dereference Findbugs Critical Nullcheck of value previously dereferenced Findbugs Critical Don't use removeAll to clear a collection Findbugs Critical Method may fail to close database resource Findbugs Critical Method may fail to close stream Findbugs Critical Method may fail to close database resource.
There is a lot of discussion on which is the most appropriate call.
It all boils down to how many threads you want to notify and if there is a reason for notifying thread will be notified and will be chosen by the JVM.
In the case of many waiting guarantees that all monitoring threads on the object will wake up and start running.
The trade-off is the slight performance cost for waking up threads that can't do anything anyway.
If you are not sure which call to use, then.
Consider the classic producer/consumer where the producer produces a packet to be consumed by only one consumer from the packet queue.
There is no point in waking violation as a false-positive.
StringBuffer instantiation with char Instantiating a StringBuffer with char will not append the character to the buffer, but it will be converted to int, which is used to define the buffer's size.
Character c will be automatically converted into int and the result is used to initialize the buffer's length size.
Alternatively, you can create the buffer and append the char or construct it using double quotes.
Use StringBuffer for String appends When concatenating Strings using the + operator, the compiler actually uses StringBuffer to perform the operation.
For simple concatenations, this is fine but inside a loop would cause a StringBuffer object to be instantiated in each iteration, wasting memory and degrading performance.
The compiler would instantiate five objects to perform the concatenation.
Constructor calls overridable method To better allow inheritance and provide a healthy framework, free of bugs, calling overridable methods in class constructors is not acceptable and can cause many problems from exceptions to inconsistent object state.
Practically, this is instantiating a subclass which overrides a method called in the superclass constructor.
Close Resource When opening a Connection, Statement, or a ResultSet always close the resource in a finally block, as shown in the following code:
Leaving open connections and result sets can very quickly exhaust the connection pool.
To keep the finally block simple, you could create a static utility method to handle the closing of  resources:
Ambiguous invocation of either an inherited or outer method When you are invoking a method of an inner class and want to be resolved to the outer class implementation, use super to clarify this.
Additionally, you can use the this keyword to emphasize that the inherited method is the one called, which is the default behavior nevertheless.
Consider returning a zero length array rather than null Instead of returning a null reference when there are no results, it is better to return an empty array or an empty list.
In this way, callers of the method will not have to check for possible null returns.
To prevent allocating additional heap space each time a zero length array return is required, we can define a static zero length array, thus returning the same reference without allocating any more memory.
Method ignores return value When a method is invoked on an immutable object, the object is not updated but a new one is returned.
The internal state of the String object is not changed because the method replace(..) returns a new String.
The correct version is to reassign the processed value as follows:
Method does not release lock on all paths In a multithread environment, it is essential to ensure that thread locks are released upon a task's completion.
Otherwise, monitors could never access the object and get locked out indefinitely.
The best place to release a lock is in the finally block, as shown in the following code:
Null pointer dereference A null pointer dereference causes NullPointerException to happen at runtime, so this violation is quite important and has to be taken care of.
If the role is null, the highlighted code will throw NullPointerException.
If the role variable is checked for null after it has been dereferenced, a Nullcheck of value previously dereferenced violation is triggered because the check is redundant.
Suspicious reference comparison objects and evaluate whether they have the same state/characteristics is to use the.
Misplaced null check A misplaced null check can lead to NullPointerException.
The correct way is to place the null check in front of the if statement.
The second part of the statement will be evaluated only if the the role variable is not null:
Impossible cast Impossible cast means that ClassCastException will be thrown.
To better understand this violation, let's look at the following example.
The variable obj is an Administrator but also a User and an Object, so casting obj back to User and Object.
Since Administrator is a subclass of User, the compiler has enough information to perform the casting.
When we do casting, we provide the compiler with a hint telling that the given object is of a specific type, but if the compiler has not enough information to perform the operation a cast exception is thrown.
Casting User to Administrator will probably not work because it is higher in the inheritance tree.
Apart from the hierarchy, another requirement to perform casting is that both classes are loaded by the same classloader.
Program flow rules The next set of 14 rules cover code handling program flow and general exception handling violations.
Do not throw exception in finally Avoid throwing exceptions in the finally block because it might hide other more.
Otherwise, if process throws an exception and later in the finally block.
A better practice would be to either handle or log all exceptions inside a finally block and not throw new ones.
Finalize does not call Super Finalize method is invoked by the garbage collector when the JVM determines that the object is eligible for collecting.
The Garbage Collector has to check the object twice: once to run resurrected during finalization.
Avoid calling finalize A healthy application should not rely on explicitly invoking finalization methods and it should leave the garbage collector take care of memory clean up.
Avoid catching NPE NullPointerException (NPE) is a runtime unchecked exception and catching it is almost always a bad idea.
An exception to this rule is in situations when there is no other choice and NPEs are thrown from third-party code/libraries.
Method ignores exceptional return value When a method returns a value with special meaning, the returned value should the files and returns a Boolean value.
To verify that the file is deleted, you have to check the return value of the delete method to be true.
If the deletion operation was unsuccessful, it returns false and the caller of the method should take action, probably informing the end user that the file was not deleted.
Switch statement found where default case is missing When writing cases for a switch statement, always provide a default case; otherwise, the logical errors may occur.
For example, consider the following switch statement where according to a car's model (int value), a color is selected:
In this case, the caller method has supplied an unsupported model number, and therefore this should be notified.
To handle all invalid cases, we can add a default case throwing an IllegalArgumentException with an appropriate message, as shown in the following code:
Missing break in switch Omitting break in a switch statement can obviously yield unexpected results.
Let's visit the previous example and assume that the break for case 0 is missing.
Avoid catching Throwable Catching Throwable is a bad form since it catches all kinds of exceptions—both checked and runtime ones.
Runtime exceptions are supposed to be thrown at runtime and in most cases are unrecoverable, such as OutOfMemoryError.
The original Findbugs description of the violation explains the problem better in the following one-liner:
Catching Throwable is dangerous because it casts too wide a net.
Security rules Finally, add eight more violations checking security issues.
Class exposes synchronization and semaphores in its public interface The Findbugs explanation on this rule is pretty clear:
Client classes that use this class, may, in addition, use an instance of this class as a synchronizing object.
Because two classes are using the same object for synchronization, Multithread correctness is suspect.
You should not synchronize nor call semaphore methods on a public reference.
Consider using an internal private member variable to control synchronization.
Method returns internal array When passing arrays between objects, it is safe to always return a clone of the array and not the original one.
That is because the caller can change the contents of the array affecting the array's state across all objects that reference to it.
If the array or list holds security-critical data then just passing it directly to a caller that can modify the reference creates a potential security risk.
If you can guarantee that the caller is trusted, you can treat this violation as a false-positive.
Hardcoded constant database password Consider the following code where we connect using JDBC to a MySQL database:
Notice the database credentials in the highlighted lines are hardcoded and this triggers the violation.
To resolve this, you could read the password from a properties file accessible only to the software locally.
Reading the username and password from a properties file is shown in the following code:
Installing the Violation Density plugin The Violation Density plugin provides an alternative way to read quality for a project.
Instead of getting feedback about the overall quality (Rules Compliance Index), the density plugin informs on how much the source code has violations at percentage value.
To install the plugin, follow the same installation process for all plugins we have installed so far, remembering to restart Sonar server after installation is complete.
Integrating Sonar to Eclipse While writing code, it is convenient to have quality and violations feedback easily available without the need to launch a web browser and review analysis results.
The ideal scenario would be to have live feedback right in your IDE.
This is exactly what Sonar Eclipse does, adding the Sonar perspective to your Eclipse installation.
Next, we will go through the installation process of the Eclipse plugin.
Eclipse will fetch available plugins hosted at the preceding address.
Expand Sonar from the list, check Sonar Integration for Eclipse (Required), and click on Next.
Accept the license by clicking on the appropriate radio button and click on Next to start the installation process.
Wait for the plugin to install and restart Eclipse when prompted.
Finally, having restarted Eclipse, we have to configure the plugin.
Go to Window from the Eclipse menu and click on Preferences.
Find Sonar on the left list and click on it to view a list of preconfigured servers.
Change the Sonar server URL as needed and fill in your Sonar user credentials.
Afterwards, click on Test Connection to verify the settings, and then click on Finish to save them.
The Sonar Eclipse plugin is now fully configured and ready to use with your Eclipse projects.
Linking an Eclipse project to Sonar server To associate a project with Sonar, right-click on a project inside the package explorer.
Click on Configure from the pop-up menu and select Associate with Sonar....
Select the Sonar server where the project is hosted from the drop-down menu, select the project you want to associate to Sonar from the list, and click on Find on Server.
Wait a few moments for the plugin to locate the hosted project and then click on Finish.
Right-click on it in the package explorer and locate the new Sonar option from the menu.
From here, you can open the Sonar dashboard inside Eclipse, perform a local analysis, or disassociate the project from Sonar (Remove Sonar Nature)
Using the Sonar perspective To open the new Sonar perspective, go to Window then Open Perspective and select Other from the submenu.
From the dialog that opens up, find and click on the Sonar perspective.
The Sonar perspective looks as shown in the following screenshot:
The Measures panel at the right gets continuously updated as you select and edit different classes inside the eclipse IDE.
On the topmost place sit measures you have added to favorites for easy reference.
To add a favorite measure, simply select it, right-click, and click on Add to favorites.
You can review violations for a class by clicking on the Violations tab located at the bottom panel.
Double-click on a violation and the editor will focus and highlight the corresponding line in your source file.
Mouse over the violation indicator on the left of the line to read a brief description about the violation.
To remove a violation (a false-positive for example ), right-click on it in the Violations tab and select Delete from the menu.
The Hotspots tab provides an overview about high-level metrics such as Complexity, Violations, and Duplicated lines.
You can filter the list by selecting the desired measure.
The list features classes in descending order, for example from most complex ones to simpler.
Click on a class name to open it in the Java editor.
The Web tab hosts the Sonar Resource viewer and renders the class and all information exactly as it is seen from inside the web browser.
Summary In this chapter, we saw in detail and added more Sonar rules to the Packt profile to cover potential bug violations.
We added a new plugin to our Sonar installation, the Violation Density one, and integrated Sonar to the Eclipse IDE to streamline the development process.
In the next chapter, we will continue to work on the Packt profile, adding rules to cover another quality axis, documentation.
While we have used the component so far to locate violations, a more thorough inspection of the component is essential so as to better leverage the functionality it has to offer.
Refining Your Documentation In this chapter, we will examine how we can use Sonar to evaluate results on documentation and comments levels in our projects.
We will detail Sonar's metrics on documentation and comments size and add rules which govern documentation in the Packt profile.
We will go through the process of locating documentation omissions using Sonar widgets and components, and finally we will configure Maven to generate documentation automatically, embedding it inside Sonar using the Sonar Doxygen plugin.
Writing effective documentation Undocumented code is useless code to anyone other than the developers.
On the other hand, excessive documentation explaining even minor details makes code harder to read than helping the developer.
All in all, the matter of writing precise and adequate documentation is outside the scope of the book, but is essential to at least provide some general pointers and references.
As you probably already know, Javadoc is the official documentation generation system introduced by Sun Microsystems.
How to write documentation comments for the Javadoc tool Make sure to visit Oracle's comprehensive Javadoc guide at the following URL: http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/ documentation/index-137868.html.
Lines between the opening and closing tags start with *
Javadoc common tags The following table lists the most commonly used Javadoc tags along with a small description:
Describes an exception that may be thrown from this method (@exception and.
The following is an example putting to use the previous tags:
Documentation metrics definitions Sonar features a set of metrics to measure project documentation and comments.
Before examining documentation rules, it is wise to first discuss and detail these metrics.
They are available from the project dashboard within the Comments & Duplications widget, as shown in the following screenshot:
Documentation metrics are on the left section of the widget.
Click on a metric to get a list of packages/classes and their measured values.
Metrics which measure code and documentation size are as follows:
Lines of code: Number of actual lines of code without counting blank lines, comments, commented-out code, and header file comment used for licensing.
Density of comment lines: Number of comment lines with respect to total Lines Of Code.
Density of public documented API: Number of public API comment lines with respect to total Lines Of Code.
Comment lines Comment lines is the total number of comments inside Javadoc blocks, multi-line comments, and single-line comments.
Empty comment lines and header comments usually used for licensing purposes are not counted.
Commented-out Lines of Code This metric equals to the total number of commented-out lines of code.
Code inside Javadoc blocks does not count towards the total.
For example, the following lines are not counted because they lie inside a Javadoc block:
In the following screenshot, Sonar reports a density of 53.1%:
A DCL value of 50% means that the number of lines of comments are equal to the number of lines of code.
A project may lack in documentation but at least the public API documentation should be abundant and at high levels.
That's why we are going to create an alert monitoring this measure.
Monitoring documentation levels Next, we will use Sonar's alerting mechanism to monitor documentation on public APIs.
From Configuration go to Quality Profiles and select the packt profile we have already created.
Move on to Alerts Tab and create the alert as shown:
Here is how the alert shows in the project list (mouse over the icon to get more information):
Statements This is the number of statements as defined in the Java Language Specification but without block definitions.
The statements counter gets incremented by one each time an expression (if, else, while, do, for, switch, break, continue, return, throw, synchronized, catch, or finally) is encountered.
The statements counter is not incremented by a class, method, field, annotation definition, or by a package and import declaration.
In Java, any sequence of statements can be grouped together to function as a single statement by enclosing the sequence in braces.
Sonar ignores such groups and counts all distinct statements within the block.
Overview of Sonar documentation violations Sonar features a total of 10 rules that cover documentation and comments.
Eight of them are of Major severity and two of minor.
We are going to convert them all to Major level in order to get a rounded cost at 30 points.
The rules though, can be further categorized in two main categories:
When adding the following rules to the custom packt profile, change all minor severities to major:
Undocumented API Check that each public class, interface, method, and constructor has a Javadoc comment.
The following public methods/constructors are not concerned by this rule:
To allow documented java.lang.RuntimeExceptions that are not declared, set the property allowUndeclaredRTE to true.
The scope to verify is specified using the Scope class and defaults to Scope.PRIVATE.
To verify another scope, set the property scope to a different scope.
Additionally, you can use the following parameters to better control the check:
Javadoc Parameter Description allowMissingParamTags Suppress error messages about parameters and type.
Javadoc is not required on a method that is tagged with the @Override annotation.
Hence, Checkstyle supports using the convention of using a single {@inheritDoc} tag instead of all the other tags.
Note that only inheritable items will allow the {@inheritDoc} tag to be used in place of comments.
Static methods at all visibilities, private non-static methods, and constructors are not inheritable.
Javadoc Package Javadoc Package checks that each Java package has a Javadoc file used for commenting.
By default, it only allows the inclusion of a package-info.java file, but can be configured to allow package.html files as well.
An error will be reported if both files exist, as this is not allowed by the Javadoc tool.
Javadoc Style Javadoc Style validates Javadoc comments to help ensure they are well formed.
Ensure the first sentence ends with proper punctuation (that is a period, question mark, or exclamation mark, by default)
Javadoc automatically places the first sentence in the method summary table and index.
All items eligible for the {@inheritDoc} tag are exempt from this requirement.
Check text for Javadoc statements that do not have any description.
Verify that HTML tags have corresponding end tags and issues an Unclosed HTML tag found: error if not.
An Extra HTML tag found: error is issued if an end tag is found without a previous open tag.
Check that a package Javadoc comment is well formed (as described previously) and not missing from any package-info.java files.
By default, it does not check for author or version tags.
The scope to verify is specified using the Scope class and defaults to Scope.PRIVATE.
To verify another scope, set property scope to one of the scope constants.
To define the format for an author tag or a version tag, set property authorFormat or versionFormat respectively to a regular expression.
Error messages about type parameters for which no param tags are present can be suppressed by defining property allowMissingParamTags.
Inline Comments Rules The following table lists the rules that check empty and uncommented constructors/methods:
Uncommented Empty Constructor Uncommented Empty Constructor finds instances where a constructor does not contain statements, but there is no comment.
By explicitly commenting empty constructors, it is easier to distinguish between intentional (commented) and unintentional empty constructors.
Uncommented Empty Method Uncommented Empty Method finds instances where a method does not contain statements, but there is no comment.
By explicitly commenting empty methods, it is easier to distinguish between intentional (commented) and unintentional empty methods.
Locating undocumented code The Comments & Duplications widget inside the project dashboard provides an overview about documentation.
From there we can further browse to undocumented classes by clicking on a metric and finally getting down to source code.
Click on the Comments or the Public Undocumented API metric displayed in the widget.
Select a package to drill down or a class from the list.
If you select a class, the source viewer opens up focused on the Source tab.
Read on the header of the source viewer and locate the Comments metrics and the Public documented API on the third and fourth column.
Filter the source viewer selecting Javadoc-related violations from the select menu.
Creating the documentation filter To provide a view regarding documentation and comments for all projects, we can create a custom filter including filtered information on these topics.
Log in as Administrator and from Sonar's main page click on Add Filter at the top left.
Name it Documentation and check the Shared checkbox to make it available to other users.
Then, click on Save & Preview to save the filter and move onto its configuration.
Next from the Display panel, we can add value columns as we desire.
Select a value from the list, for example Public documented API (%), and click on Add.
You can preview the project list at the bottom of the panel.
To remove a column, click on the trashcan button and to rearrange it, click on the left/right arrow buttons.
Add the documentation and comments metrics you want and click on Save & Close to save changes.
The new filter is now available from the Sonar main page as a separate view under the Documentation tab.
From now on you can use this filter to get a summary on documentation levels across all your projects.
Generating documentation automatically Both Ant and Maven use the Javadoc tool to automatically generate documentation.
If you are using Ant, simply navigate to a project's root directory and enter the following command:
For Maven you first have to add the javadoc plugin.
To do this, edit the pom.xml file and add the following lines at the corresponding location:
From now on whenever the site goal, a$ mvn site:site, is executed, project Javadocs will be generated and included in a dedicated project site generated by Maven along with other useful project information.
Next, to provide more complete documentation featuring class diagrams, call graphs, and through class and method indexing embedded into Sonar, we will install Graphviz and Doxygen.
These tools are used by the Sonar Documentation plugin to bring project documentation into the dashboard.
Installing Graphviz Graphviz is a diagrams and networks visualization tool.
It can be used to visualize program flow and produce call graphs, in an effort to complement existing documentation, and to better understand how objects interact with each other.
Doxygen leverages Graphviz functionality to produce class and object interaction diagrams, including them in the final Javadoc.
To install Graphviz in Linux, (Debian or Ubuntu distributions), open a terminal and enter the following command:
For other Linux distributions, there are debian and rpm packages available at the Graphviz download page.
Warning for Vista users Even if you are logged in as Administrator, double-clicking on the MSI file or running the MSI file from a command prompt may still not provide sufficient privileges.
Installing Doxygen The Doxygen documentation system supports numerous programming languages and can generate documentation from a set of documented source files in HTML, RTF, hyperlinked PDF, and Unix man pages formats.
If you are on Linux, you can find rpm and debian packages available at the following links:
If you use the synaptic manager, you can install it by entering in the terminal the following command:
You need to restart the Sonar Server for the process to complete.
The generated documentation can be browsed from the project dashboard.
To configure the plugin, go to Configuration | General Settings.
Under Doxygen there are three global configuration properties as follows:
If Sonar server is used to access the documentation, the path should be set to /war/sonar-server.
Hosting Documentation Plugin-generated documentation can be hosted within the Sonar server but this could cause performance issues.
From the project dashboard, click on the Documentation item from the left navigation menu to browse generated documentation.
From there you can use the tabs to navigate through the documentation browsing graphs will be included at each page.
The plugin can be further configured at project level, by clicking Documentation under Configuration from the project dashboard.
Summary In this chapter, we examined how Sonar manages and presents documentation levels across our projects.
Having reviewed Sonar's metrics and the formulae, we added documentation and comments rules to the custom packt profile.
We have seen how to locate documentation violations and created a custom filter to provide a summarized view on all projects regarding documentation and comments.
Finally, we installed and configured Maven's documentation plugin to automatically generate Javadoc documentation and installed the Sonar Doxygen plugin to make the project documentation available inside the project dashboard.
In the next chapter, we will learn about duplicated code and how to locate it.
Sonar offers some interesting widgets to easily pin down duplicated blocks of code and lines, along with the Useless Code plugin, which aggregates duplicated source code sections and presents them across all parts inside a project.
Additionally, we will see how Sonar detects duplication not only within one project but also across all of them.
Working with Duplicated Code In this chapter, we will review how Sonar tracks duplication in our software application.
Sonar features four essential metrics to measure duplication across projects and presents metrics in a widget format inside the project dashboard.
Knowing the metrics and having created an alert when duplication metrics , we will take a look at the widget and use it to effectively drill down to our source code, locating duplicated lines and blocks.
To get a top-layer view, we will use the Radiator component, as it is ideal to highlight duplication spread for large projects.
Code duplication Duplicated code is simply copied and pasted at various places across a software project.
When something "works", why not clone it and reuse by copying it? Code duplication is a sign of bad design raising complexity with no reason.
What if the popular and duplicated code someday has to change or is buggy? Obviously, duplicated code would have to be corrected at numerous places across your project.
There are some common techniques such as method extraction to attack the problem, but in many cases, duplicated code highlights the inability of our design and the lack of flexibility usually requiring more advanced solutions.
Of course, when resources are limited, refactoring and redesigning is a luxury.
What we can do is correct the bug and yes, duplicate code if necessary and put redesign issues to the back burner.
Sonar will trace duplicated blocks and remind us, and even alert us, when duplication reaches dangerous levels.
Don't Repeat Yourself (DRY) Don't Repeat Yourself is the software development practice where code duplication is unacceptable.
Similar to database systems, source code should be normalized and with every piece of code representing a single and specific functionality.
This practice is better known by the DRY acronym and was introduced by Andy Hunt and Dave Thomas in their book, The Pragmatic Programmer.
Every piece of knowledge must have a single, unambiguous, authoritative representation within a system.
Sonar code duplication metrics Sonar uses the following four metrics to cover code duplication.
Duplicated lines can also be expressed as a percentage value and we will create an alert with a threshold value of five percent.
Duplicated Files Number of files containing duplicated lines or blocks.
Creating Duplicated Code Alert Log in to Sonar and navigate to the custom packt profile configuration screen.
Add a new alert as shown in the following screenshot:
With the previous configuration, when duplication levels reach 10% or higher, an alert at level error will be triggered.
If duplication is higher than 5%, the alert will be shown as a warning.
Locating duplicated code with Sonar All duplication metrics are accessible from the project dashboard beside the Comments section.
Notice how the metric in the large font is highlighted to alert us that the duplication levels are above five percent.
All metrics are hyperlinks allowing us to drill down and locate the source.
Click any of the first two metrics (percentage and number of physical lines) to navigate to the drill down screen.
From left to right, you can see three panels (Project, Package, and Class) with the leftmost one listing all classes that contain duplicated code.
The number next to a class name is the number of physical lines duplicated.
Similarly, the blocks and files metrics lead to the same three-panel screen, although the numbers next to each class correspond to blocks of duplicated lines instead of raw lines.
Then, click on a package to filter class results or on any class to examine it inside the source viewer.
As you can see, the source viewer automatically focuses on the Duplication tab.
The header of the tab presents the total number of lines, duplicated lines, and blocks.
Below the header, you can see where actual duplication occurs at block and line level.
Click on the Expand button to view the full block.
On the left of each block, there is a list of all files which contain the duplicated code.
Click on them to switch the view and examine the duplicated code in every file.
Cross-project duplication detection Sonar also detects duplicated code across different software projects.
This feedback could help us decide according to the spread of the duplication whether to export such code to an external and common library.
In the following two screenshots, we see how Sonar has detected duplicated code between Spring XML library and a Camel Components library:
StaxStreamXmlReader and StaxStreamXMLReader, an indication for a possible extension opportunity.
Using the Radiator component to detect duplication The Radiator component is always useful when we want to get a top-down view on metrics, allowing us to further drill down from project to line level.
So let us put it to use with duplication metrics.
The component is available from any project dashboard via link in the right-hand menu.
Set the Size selection menu to Duplicated lines metric and the Color one to Duplicated lines (%)
Remember that you can drill down to packages with left-click and move back up with right-click.
Left click on the javax.swing.plaf.multi package to inspect how duplication is distributed among classes inside that package.
You can browse the whole JDK7 from the demo Sonar site at http://nemo.sonarsource.org/
The Useless Code Tracker plugin The Useless Code Tracker plugin is a nice addition, reporting on the total number of lines that can potentially be removed from the source code.
It examines and tracks source code on the following three axes and aggregates the results into a single number value:
The following screenshot shows the Useless Code Tracker plugin in action.
The bold number is the total number of lines that can potentially be removed from your source code.
This value is then broken down into the three sections we mentioned.
Note that you can click on each section to drill down to class level and review the exact classes with duplicated code.
Tracking duplicated lines The number of lines that are duplicated and could be potentially eliminated depends on how the duplication is distributed across the source code.
What we want to know is how many blocks of code are duplicated, along with a line count for each block.
For example, Sonar could report a block of code amounting to 100 lines of code duplicated in three different areas in our source code.
Tracking dead code Sonar tracks the unused code inside private methods with the PMD:UnusedPrivateMethod or SQUID:UnusedPrivateMethod checks.
Lines within these methods are eligible to be included and reported by the tracker.
The same counts for unused protected methods, which are detected with the PMD:UnusedProtectedMethod or SQUID:UnusedProtectedMethod rules.
Check the configuration of the packt Sonar profile and make sure that the following rules are enabled:
The Squid rules are more effective and preferred to the PMD ones because they generate less false-positives and detect more dead code.
The official description of the Squid rules concerning unused protected methods explains thoroughly when a method is considered to be unused.
Protected methods that are never used by any class in the same project are strongly suspected to be dead code.
Dead code means unnecessary, inoperative code that should be removed.
This helps in maintenance by decreasing the maintained code size, making it easier to understand the program, and preventing bugs from being introduced.
In the following cases, unused protected methods are not considered as dead code by Sonar:
Protected methods which override a method from a parent class •	 Protected methods of an abstract class.
Find the Useless Code Tracker plugin, click on Install, and remember that the installation process completes after a Sonar server restart.
Then, from a project dashboard, click on Configure Widgets at the top-left corner to bring up the widgets selection area and click on Add on the plugin to add it to the dashboard.
Using extraction and inheritance to attack duplication Eliminating code duplication is not always easy, but there are some pretty straightforward refactoring techniques that help in resolving such problems.
Once duplicated lines are recognized, the next step is to examine whether the duplicated code could be simply eliminated and replaced with a method call.
If this is not viable, then we could resort to the Extract Method refactoring practice.
The Extract Method refactoring pattern For long parts of duplicated code, we could remove the duplication by moving functionality and code to a single shared place inside our project.
All parts of our program could then utilize this shared part of code instead of duplicating it.
You have a code fragment that can be grouped together.
Turn the fragment into a method whose name explains the purpose of the method.
Many modern IDEs support Extract Method capabilities to streamline the process.
To better illustrate the process let us go through a real life example.
The following code is part of a user-to-user recommendation system based on a custom user recommender before calling methods to perform recommendation.
This chunk of code is duplicated wherever recommendation takes place, so it could be extracted to a public member method of the UserRecommender class.
Inside the Eclipse IDE, we select the previous highlighted code fragment and rightclick to bring up the editor menu.
Clicking on the Preview button, we can see how our final class will be affected.
Notice how the configuration lines will be replaced by a single call to the new extracted method.
Here is how the class looks like after the extraction:
Refactoring with inheritance In another very simple example, let's suppose that we want to create a new user recommender that configures or acts a little differently.
Instead of copying and pasting the existing one and duplicating code, we inherit the functionality by subclassing.
The class UserCorrelation extends UserRecommender and changes the similarity model in the following highlighted lines of code.
Summary In this chapter, we saw what metrics Sonar uses to track code duplication and how to use the code widget inside the project dashboard to locate duplicated code.
Sonar covers duplication not only at line block and file level in a single project but detects duplicate code across separate projects too.
We created an alert to notify us when duplication reaches threshold values and used the Radiator component to get a better synopsis on duplication and its spread.
Finally, we briefly discussed two of the most common techniques in an effort to attack duplication problems such as method extraction and inheritance.
In the next chapter, we will discuss complexity and review some of the more advanced and critical metrics Sonar features.
In this chapter, we will discuss how Sonar reports on complexity and the measures it supports.
Firstly, we will clarify how complexity in Java programs is calculated and then look into the concepts of coupling, cohesion, and dependencies.
Finally, we will review how Sonar reports on those measures and especially detail the design matrix, which is an essential component to manage dependencies in complex software pieces.
Measuring software complexity Software and its complexity could be described as of how difficult it is to understand, alter, or extend the internal interaction of its components.
The more complex the components of the software are, the more difficult it is to change them or add new functionality and features, preserving stability.
In some cases, large complexity can even negate refactoring techniques because of the great effort required.
A quicker solution would be to totally rewrite those complex pieces of code.
There are many different metrics to measure the complexity of a software component.
Cyclomatic Complexity evaluates the complexity of methods in isolation, while Response for Class, Coupling, and Cohesion examine the complexity of the component in correlation to other interacting components.
McCabe, and is the most popular and widely accepted method of measuring code complexity.
The metric defines a formula to calculate the complexity of code by taking into account all the possible independent paths that program flow could follow.
For instance, code with multiple decision points (if - else) and loops will rank as more complex than raw statements.
The execution path of a method could be laid out as a graph flow with nodes representing statements, decision points, loops, and exit points.
To make this clear, let's look at following simple method, which checks whether a number is prime or not.
The method consists of a few statements, a while loop, an if decision, and a return exit point:
To produce the graph, let's assign a node to each statement with letters from A to G,
A graph representation for the given method would look like the one shown in the following diagram.
Following the statements of the code, we connect the nodes with edges.
For multiple outcomes (for example, an if condition), we connect all possible nodes for each outcome.
For example, from node C we could proceed to D in case i this is represented in the graph by connecting node C to both D and G.
Finally, the number of exit points equals to 1 for the single return call at the end of.
To calculate the Cyclomatic Complexity for this method, use the following formula:
In general, when calculating Cyclomatic Complexity in Java, add one point of CC each time you encounter one of the following:
Type Add one CC whenever you encounter: Methods return Control flow if, else, case, default.
For example, we can quickly calculate that the following method has CC of 3:
Cohesion and coupling In object-oriented programming (OOP), cohesion and coupling are two fundamental concepts.
The basic principle is to have classes with loose coupling and high cohesion.
Loose coupling enables modularized packages that do not heavily rely on each other, while high cohesion provides tight and solid components with clearly defined responsibilities.
High coupling means that a class relies on many other classes, while low cohesion signals for a class could be split into separate ones, offering fine-grained functionality.
Afferent coupling Afferent (incoming) coupling is the total number of classes that depend on a given class.
In Sonar, you can view afferent coupling within the Sonar source viewer under the Dependencies tab.
For example, the afferent coupling for the class ReflectionToStringBuilder in the Apache commons-lang project equals to 4
Type the class name in the top-right search box from Sonar to find the class and open it in the source viewer.
Then, click on the Dependencies tab to view the list of classes that.
Efferent coupling On the contrary, efferent (outgoing) coupling is the number of classes on which a given class depends, and has to be imported.
For ReflectionToStringBuilder, the efferent coupling equals to 3 as you can see in the Dependencies tab:
Sonar Code Complexity metrics Sonar hosts a wide selection of complexity-related rules to help us monitor our software projects.
Next, we are going to add 17 rules of major severity to the custom packt profile.
Log in to Sonar as administrator and add the following rules to the custom packt profile:
Boolean Expression Complexity This rule restricts the total number of Boolean operators within an expression.
The default value is three, but can be overridden from the profile configuration screen.
Whenever an expression with more operators is parsed, a violation will be thrown.
Too many conditions render code difficult to read and debug.
Additionally, the effort to unit test multiple conditions and achieve high-test coverage grows exponentially.
Class Data Abstraction Coupling Data Abstraction Coupling (DAC) measures the number of instantiations of other classes within the given class—it is not caused by inheritance.
If a class has a local variable that is an instantiation (object) of another class, there is data abstraction coupling.
A DAC higher than 7 indicates an overly complicated class structure.
The maximum threshold allowed is 7 and can be configured to your liking from Sonar profile configuration screen.
Class Fan Out Complexity Class Fan Out Complexity (CFOC) measures the number of classes on which the given class depends.
A class with high CFOC has high responsibility featuring many.
A value higher than this indicates a complex class that could be refactored into separate components.
JavaNCSS JavaNCSS determines the complexity of methods, classes, and files by counting the Non Commenting Source Statements (NCSS)
This check adheres to the specification for the JavaNCSS-Tool written by Chr.
Roughly said, the NCSS metric is calculated by counting the source lines that are not comments and it is (nearly) equivalent to counting the semicolons and opening curly braces.
The NCSS for a class is summarized from the NCSS of all its methods, the NCSS of its nested classes, and the number of member variable declarations.
The NCSS for a file is summarized from the NCSS of all its top-level classes, the number of imports, and the package declaration.
Too large methods and classes are hard to read and costly to maintain.
A large NCSS number often means that a method or class has too many responsibilities and/or functionalities, which should be decomposed into smaller units.
Too many methods A class with too many methods is probably a good suspect for refactoring, in order to reduce its complexity and find a way to have more fine-grained objects.
Too many fields Classes that have too many fields could be redesigned to have fewer fields, possibly through some nested object grouping of some of the information.
For example, a class with city, state, or zip fields could instead have one Address field.
Avoid too complex class This check is similar to Checkstyle's Cyclomatic Complexity, but it is implemented by the Squid rule engine.
Avoid too deep inheritance tree Inheritance is certainly one of the most valuable concepts of object-oriented programming.
It is a way to compartmentalize and re-use code by creating collections of attributes and behaviors called classes, which can be based on previously created classes.
However, abusing this concept by creating a deep inheritance tree can lead to very complex and unmaintainable source code.
Most of the time, a too deep inheritance tree is due to bad object-oriented design, which has led to systematic use of inheritance when composition would suit better.
To view the level of inheritance for a class, open it from Sonar and look at the header for the Depth in Tree value:
The Response for Class metric The Response for Class (RFC) metric is the total number of methods that can potentially be executed in response to a message received by an object of a class.
This number is the sum of the methods of the class, and all distinct methods are invoked directly within the class methods.
Additionally, inherited methods are counted, but overridden methods are not, because only one method of a particular signature will always be available to an object of a given class.
The Response Set (RS) of a class is a set of methods that can potentially be executed by an object of that class.
Notice that a given method is counted only once even if it is invoked many times in the call graph as a response to a message.
Classes with high RFC are more complex and prove to be difficult to debug and test, because of high cross-object communication and higher variance in the potential responses and call graphs, as responses to messages received by that class.
In Sonar, you can get information for the RFC metric from the project dashboard.
The following screenshot shows the average RFC for the Apache commons-lang project.
Below the Response for Class value, there is a distribution graph showing the RFC value per class count in steps of five.
A healthy distribution is to have substantially more classes with low RFC, and less as the RFC metric increases.
Click on the RFC metric value from the project dashboard to browse to a two-panel screen listing packages on the left, and their respective classes on the right.
The number beside each class is the RFC for that class.
The number inside the packages panel is the average RFC for the classes of that package.
Clicking in any package will filter the classes' panel, while clicking on a class name will open up the class below the panel, within the Sonar source browser.
Find and click on the org.apache.commons.lang3.text.translate package from the left panel, and then click on the AggregateTranslator class from the right:
To better understand how the RFC is calculated, let's examine the simple AggregateTranslator class.
The source code for the class is presented below with header licensing details omitted for clarity.
The highlighted parts of the following code show the additional method calls that contribute to RFC also.
These additional calls bring the total RFC value to 4
Execution ends whenever * the first translator consumes codepoints from the input.
The first translator to consume codepoints from the input is the 'winner'
Execution stops with the number of consumed codepoints being returned.
The AggregateTranslator class extends the CharSequenceTranslator which has an RFC of 20
Why does AggregateTranslator end up with an RFC of only 4?
This is because Sonar does not take into account the parent class when calculating RFC.
Since then, the metric was redefined and revised numerous times, with LCOM5 being the latest version.
Sonar incorporates version four of the metric, hence the LCOM4 naming.
The metric measures the degree to which methods and fields within a class are related to one another, providing one or more components.
To calculate the LCOM4 value, we have to determine how many connected groups of related methods and fields exist in a class:
According to the single responsibility principle, a class should provide a single Otherwise, the class lacks cohesion and could be broken down to separate less complex classes with single responsibilities.
To better understand how LCOM4 is calculated, consider a class consisting of methods A, B, C, and D and fields x,y, and z.
A method that invokes another class method or accesses a field is considered connected to that method or field and vice versa.
In the first example, method A invokes method B, which accesses field x, and method C invokes method D, which accesses fields y and z:
As shown in the preceding diagram, the class contains two separate components and could potentially be split into two different classes, one with methods A and B and field x, and the other with methods C and D and fields x and z.
Sonar reports LCOM4 from the project dashboard along with a distribution graph similar to the one for the RFC metric.
Click on any of the two values to navigate to the two-panel view with packages on the left and classes on the right.
Click on a class to open up the Sonar source browser with focus on the LCOM4 tab, as shown in the following screenshot.
Sonar will present the identified separately connected components within the class in panels.
Each block contains the related methods and fields for that group—yellow circles mark the fields, and red circles mark the methods.
However, there are cases and practices where a high LCOM4 value is natural, for example, classes with the responsibility to instantiate and configure other objects such as Factories.
According to the ticket, Sonar will introduce a new configurable LCOM4 rule.
In the case of a falsepositive, we will be able to review the violation and define it as a false-positive from within the Sonar source viewer.
Locating and eliminating dependencies Sonar provides a widget to report on package and class dependencies.
The following screenshot shows what Sonar reports on the commons-lang project.
This is the entry point when you want to review highly coupled classes and locate dependencies that deteriorate the modularization of your packages.
Click on any number to navigate to Sonar's design matrix view.
Alternatively, you can click on the Design link from the left menu.
The design matrix lists all project packages on the left,
The right-hand side section is separated into two triangular regions.
You will notice that all dependencies to be cut are located within the upper-right triangle.
In Java, this means that there are ten imports spread in classes within five packages that should be cut in order to preserve package modularization.
Packages at the bottom should not be depending on packages that reside above them at a higher level.
They should exist as standalone packages to enable modularization and improve reusability.
Click on any number within the triangles to open a new panel below the matrix, further detailing the dependencies.
For example, clicking on number 6 reveals the following dependencies:
Using the Sonar design matrix Next, we will focus on the functionality of the Sonar design matrix.
It is essential to understand how it works in order to efficiently identify and understand a project's dependencies.
From the left column, click on the package named org.apache.commons.lang.
Now, the triangular region of the matrix is highlighted to denote this package's dependencies.
Package rows above the selected one will be highlighted on their tip with a striped box if they depend on it—the legend on the top of the matrix explains the different highlights.
In this case, we see that all packages above lang3 are striped and hence they are dependent.
To find how many files depend on lang3, cross reference the packages with the numbers in the horizontal highlighted row.
In the following screen, two of the total nine dependent packages are marked with lines to their respective number in the horizontal row:
The following table lists all packages dependent on org.apache.commons.lang3 and shows the number of their file dependencies.
The number of the file dependencies equals to the corresponding box within the vertical highlighted row:
The following table lists all packages on which org.apache.commons.lang3 depends and shows the number of their file dependencies:
So far, we have seen how to read package dependencies by using the design matrix.
To view class dependencies, you can click on any number within the triangular region to open a panel listing class dependencies for the corresponding package.
You can click on all numbers in the upper triangular region to further inspect potential cross dependencies:
The following table lists all class dependencies from the package org.apache.
To better understand the process, we will pinpoint one dependency at line level.
As you can see from the highlighted parts in the following code, the translator.
Execution ends whenever * the first translator consumes codepoints from the input.
The first translator to consume codepoints from the input is the 'winner'
Execution stops with the number of consumed codepoints being returned.
As the dependency is not widespread and if you want to move the *.lang3.text.
Next, double-click on the org.apache.commons.lang3.text.translate package row from the left-hand side of the matrix to drill down to class level.
The design matrix represents dependencies in the same manner, but only for the classes within the selected package.
As you can see, CharSequenceTranslator has an illegal dependency on AggregateTrnalstor.
To investigate further, double-click on CharSequenceTranslator to view its source code—highlighted code shows that a new instance of AggregateTranslator is returned from the translate method.
As you can see, CharSequenceTranslator is an abstract class, which is extended by AggregateTranslator.
It is quite restrictive to use an instance of a child class within the abstract.
Additionally, the responsibility to use aggregated translation methods from many translators can be moved in the abstract class or exclusively in the AggregateTranslator:
Because escaping and unescaping * is completely contextual, the API does not present two separate signatures.
Helper method to create a merger of this translator with another set of * translators.
Ideally, when all dependencies are resolved the design matrix would have an empty upper triangle, with all dependencies sitting in the lower one.
Moreover, packages at lower levels tend to be more used and imported from packages at higher levels.
So, the lower rows of the triangle would naturally be more populated with numbers denoting dependencies on upper packages.
We also discussed how it is measured and what Sonar can offer in order to help us identify complex constructs.
We saw some core measures and metrics that govern complexity such as Cyclomatic Complexity, Coupling and Cohesion, Response for Class, and Lack of Cohesion.
Then, we added the appropriate rules to the Sonar profile and examined all widgets reporting such measures.
At the end of the chapter, we focused on dependencies and detailed the Sonar design matrix, an invaluable component, which, once mastered, will enable you to isolate dependencies in a quick and efficient way.
In the next chapter, we will discuss how Sonar measures Test Coverage and Testing, as it is an essential and vital practice towards quality software.
Testing and coverage is the countermeasure towards complex software ensuring stability and expected behavior.
Code Coverage and Testing In this chapter, we will discuss how Sonar analyzes our unit tests, evaluating different code coverage criteria.
The goal is to have Sonar identify untested code and guide developers as to what tests need to be written to improve the software quality.
The platform leverages the functionality of popular Java code coverage engines and analyzes the collected coverage data taking into account other software measures such as complexity.
Thus, Sonar enhances the monolithic code coverage analysis, as it adds more layers of information on top of percentile coverage results.
For example, low-complexity statements or blocks of untested code that are rarely executed pose a lesser threat than complex and frequently executed methods.
With limited resources, we would probably want to invest time testing and fixing the second crucial part of source code, rather than the first.
Measuring code coverage Measuring code coverage is essentially the evaluation of how effective our unit or integration tests are and whether they test statements, conditions, and functions for all possible results and arguments.
When calculating code coverage, the coverage engine launches test suites with special instrumented code at runtime so as to measure which statements of the code were reached or not.
Statement coverage: All statements within a method or block were reached by the test suite.
Code coverage tools There are many different code coverage tools specifically for Java, the most popular of them, either free or commercial, being:
Sonar uses Cobertura and JaCoCo but there is support for Clover and EMMA via Sonar plugins.
The basic lifecycle of a code coverage analysis process consists of the following steps:
For the needs of the book, we will use the default Cobertura engine.
Performance tests run by the Sonar team on the four tools in 2010 show that Clover is the slower one, consuming twice the time especially when analyzing large projects.
Next, we will review all four tools in more detail, and we will also see how we can activate them in Sonar.
For more information on code coverage tools and their performance, read the excellent article Pick your code coverage tool in Sonar by the Sonar team at http://www.sonarsource.
Selecting a code coverage tool for Sonar To review the selected code coverage engine that will process the tests, log in to Sonar as administrator and click on General Settings from the left menu to navigate to the Sonar settings screen.
From here, you can view which coverage tool is currently active (default: Cobertura)
To change it, enter the corresponding key value for the desired coverage tool and click on the Save Code Coverage Settings button.
Notice that EMMA and Clover tools require installing the respective plugins first.
You can also override this global setting, by setting a different coverage tool at project level.
To do this, navigate to a project's dashboard and click on Settings on the left.
Then, click on Code Coverage and enter the key value that matches the desired code coverage tool to be used for this project.
Cobertura Cobertura is the preselected code coverage tool on a fresh Sonar installation and no additional configuration is necessary, apart from the memory allocation size for the Cobertura processes.
To change Cobertura memory settings, log in to Sonar as administrator and click on General Settings from the menu on the left-hand side.
Then, click on the Cobertura link to navigate to its configuration screen and enter in the Maxmem text field the value 128m.
Cobertura is based on the jcoverage tool created by the company jcoverage Ltd and its development has ceased since 2010
McCabe metric The cyclomatic complexity metric was introduced by Thomas McCabe, in an effort to measure complexity of software systems with accuracy.
The method calculates complexity about the control flow diagram of the software and directly correlates to it (source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/McCabe_Metric)
JaCoCo JaCoCo code coverage tool is a subproject of the EclEmma coverage tool for the Eclipse IDE.
It is a rather new project and its development is very active.
If you develop a project on Eclipse and are interested in code coverage analysis data that is integrated straight into your IDE, visit the EclEmma official website at http://www.eclemma.org.
Since Sonar version 2.12, JaCoCo is preinstalled and you can activate it from the administration settings screen (key value: jacoco)
Remember to restart the Sonar server to complete the installation process.
In standalone mode, JaCoCo generates a report like the following one (demo report available at http://www.eclemma.org/jacoco/trunk/coverage/):
The report includes two more sections displaying coverage data on methods and classes.
Each section includes a total coverage percentage, a Missed value (for example, how many lines were missed by tests), and complexity for the total complexity of the missed code areas.
Clover Sonar plugin Clover is a commercial offering by Atlassian (http://www.atlassian.com/ software/clover/overview) and is available as a Sonar plugin.
The main product integrates with Eclipse and IDEA in addition to Ant and Maven plugins.
The demo videos at Clover's official page highlight the attention to detail, especially to the user interface.
If you want to see it in action, you can download a free 30-day trial version and see for yourself.
If you have purchased a Clover license key and want to use it in Sonar, you will have to install the Sonar Clover plugin from the Update Center.
Fill in the License text field with your license key and click on Save Clover Settings.
Next, click on the Code Coverage link, fill in the Key text field with the value clover, and click Save Code Coverage Settings.
Emma Sonar plugin Emma is a free code coverage tool and came to life back in 2005
Development has now ceased with a final release in June 2005
To use Emma in Sonar, go to General Settings from Administration and set the Code Coverage property value to emma.
The following screen is a sample Emma coverage report for the Apache Velocity version 1.4 project:
The report consolidates coverage percentage data into four different sections for each level respectively—class, method, block, and line.
For more sample reports, visit Emma's official site at http://emma.sourceforge.net/samples.html.
Code coverage analysis To better understand how Sonar works and to be in a position to better evaluate code coverage results, it is necessary to take a closer look at how code coverage tools analyze tests and calculate total coverage.
The result of the coverage analysis process, although expressed as a single percentage number in Sonar, is based on many different coverage metrics.
Next, we will examine four fundamental coverage metrics used by all code coverage tools supported by Sonar:
Statement coverage Statement coverage is the most basic metric of the analysis process.
It is the building block element for the rest of the metrics.
The metric reports whether a statement was encountered during test execution.
Usually, statements and lines coincide, thus the metric is also known as line coverage.
Once a line of code is encountered, it is considered as covered.
This has the side effect of not taking into account the possibility of different execution paths for control flow statements such as the if else blocks.
If during unit testing, condition always evaluates to true then the statement coverage metric will report 99 percent coverage, missing the single statement inside the else block.
This 99 percent is misleading though as the else execution path is left out from unit tests completely.
For example, branch coverage reports a 100 percent result when a unit test's condition evaluates to true in one case and false in another.
Condition coverage Condition coverage reports on the true or false outcome of an expression.
To report 100 percent, all the operands of the expression must be tested for all possible values.
The only disadvantage of this metric is that it does not guarantee that all edges of the program will be visited.
For example, an expression evaluates always to true or false regardless of the operand values.
Path coverage Path coverage is the most thorough metric because it tests whether all possible combinations of control flow were visited during unit testing from the entry point of a method to the exit.
For example, in the following block of code, path coverage will report four different unique execution paths:
Adding another if else block would raise the total paths exponentially to a total of 8
Assessing the impact of your tests After a Sonar analysis, the first place to review testing coverage is within the project dashboard.
A dedicated widget reports total coverage in percentage form, breaking down to line and branch coverage as shown in the following screenshot:
Click on any metric from the left widget section to drill down to package level.
Packages are listed along with the coverage metric as a percentage and clicking on them lists their respective classes and coverage value on the right side of the panel.
Click on a class to open the Sonar source viewer with focus on the coverage tab.
You can view a summary of the following metrics at the top of the tab for the corresponding class.
Below the metrics, you can select from the menu on the right which parts of the source are displayed, for example, the lines or branches to cover.
Statements reached by a unit test are covered and highlighted with a green number.
For control flow statements, it is higher depending on the number of the conditions.
For a single Boolean expression, there are two conditions to cover, true and false, and the number has a maximum value of two, meaning that there are two paths that must be covered by unit tests..
In the following screen, we see that both if else blocks and inner statements are untested.
Because neither clause is ever visited, the number in red is two, which means that the block was not tested at all.
Uncovered branches In cases where branches were covered partially and not tested for all possible outcomes, Sonar highlights them with a yellow number, denoting the number of the conditions that were covered.
For example, an expression with two Boolean conditions allows four possible combinations.
A yellow number 3 means that one combination was never tested.
The green number on the left simply means that the line was reached.
Using the coverage tag cloud component The coverage cloud component provides information in a quick and efficient way.
Java classes are represented as tags a in tag cloud, while tag colors and font sizes correspond to different metrics depending on the selected mode: Quick wins or Top risk.
To view the coverage cloud, visit the dashboard of a project, click on the link Clouds from the menu on the left, and set the Color property to Coverage.
The following screenshot shows the coverage cloud for the Apache Commons library.
Mouse over a class to get metric values or click on its tag to open it in the Sonar source viewer.
Quick wins mode In Quick wins mode, the coverage cloud represents:
Top risk mode In Top risk mode, the coverage cloud represents:
Where to start testing The coverage cloud proves to be a great tool when it comes to deciding what tests to write next, since the visual representation allows quick comparisons at a glance.
Writing tests with no real value to the software product, only to technically increase coverage, is not uncommon.
It is essential that unit tests are written from a production perspective in an effort to simulate real-case scenarios and method calls.
The Top risk approach Switching to Top risk mode, we are presented with a cloud that is substantially different from the Quick wins one.
It is recommended to use this view, as it takes into account the complexity of each class irrespective of the line count.
It is more flow, and take care of standalone statements later.
The following screen is the same as the previous one, the only difference being that it is switched to Top risk mode.
After examining the second one, a quick assessment would be that converters lack coverage in general and should be tested extensively since they are fairly complex classes.
A test is a Java class containing jUnit annotations to set up the test and identify test methods.
Basically, you annotate test methods with the @Test annotation and verify results using assertion.
When you want to check a value dependent on the nature of the check and the type of the value, you call the appropriate assertion.
For example, if you want to check that the value of a Boolean variable is true, you would write: assertTrue(var)
There are many different assertions located in statically to each test class.
To start writing your own tests, download junit-4.xx.jar from https://github.
Writing a simple unit test Next, we will go through a basic test example and use the most important jUnit annotations such as:
The CalculatorTest class declares a Calculator field and two methods, which test the addition method.
Before we start executing test methods, we have to initialize the calculator inside the setUp method.
The setUp method annotated with @Before will be conveniently invoked before any actual testing takes place.
Similarly, the complete and is responsible for cleaning up resources.
The next two methods testAddition and testAdditionEx are annotated with been initialized, and therefore we can use it now for testing purposes.
However, at runtime, there is the potential of passing invalid String arguments, for example not numbers, causing NumberFormatException to be thrown.
To cover this possibility for testing purposes, we can pass invalid arguments and verify that a NumberFormatException exception is thrown by the program.
We can achieve this by defining the expected parameter of the @Test annotation equal to NumberFormatException.class and write code that intentionally throws this exception.
This is a common practice to test exception handling and verify correct program behavior.
Reviewing test results in Sonar When unit tests fail and success rate falls below 100 percent, the code coverage widget highlights the percentage value to notify us that something did not test as expected.
Below the percentile value, you can view the number of total test failures.
A failure means that a method inside a test annotated with @Test did not pass the assertion check.
Click on the percentage value or the failures number to get an overview of the affected classes.
From there you can drill down from package level to class level and pinpoint the failing test.
The numbers next to packages, classes, or methods are the total number of failures at the respective level.
When you click on test class, the Sonar source viewer opens below the drill down panel with focus on the Tests tab.
The header of the tab includes the following information from left to right:
Whenever a test fails due to assertion failure, jUnit logs a message with the expected and actual values in order to assist the developer understand what went wrong.
Summary In this chapter, we discussed what code coverage is and reviewed the tools that Sonar uses to perform such an analysis.
After a more detailed look at specific coverage metrics such as decision, condition, and path coverage, we examined the Sonar interface and how it helps us identify complex classes lacking tests.
Finally, we covered basic concepts of the jUnit testing library as a first step towards unit test writing.
In the next chapter, we will review the process of creating an integrated development environment complete with a source code repository, a build server, and Sonar according to the continuous inspection paradigm.
Integrating Sonar In this chapter, we will discuss continuous integration and inspection processes and set up a continuous integration environment to enable these practices.
We will install Software Configuration Management (SCM), and learn how to import and manage the source code hosted in it.
Then, we will install the Jenkins Continuous Integration server (Jenkins CI) and connect a project in the repository to the build server to automate the build process.
Finally, we will install the Jenkins Sonar plugin and configure a build job in Jenkins so as to automatically execute a Sonar analysis after each build.
The Continuous Inspection paradigm Continuous integration is a software development practice where team developers integrate their code frequently.
Each time a change is committed to the source code a new build is provided, usually through an automated process.
The project grows incrementally, a stable build is always available for every iteration, and build errors can be identified by team members quickly.
Continuous inspection expands and builds upon this practice, adding a layer of quality analysis at each iteration.
While continuous integration ensures stability and minimizes the effort of merging source code within the project, continuous inspection tracks quality requirements in an effort to control the quality of the final product.
To enable continuous inspection, data collection and analysis is required after each build is produced by the build server.
Continuous integration servers A continuous integration server or build server is responsible for executing build jobs and storing historical data and artifacts for each build.
A common practice is to have the build server build the project automatically by polling a source code repository whenever modifications are detected.
The build server pulls all changes and starts a new build.
The goal is to provide a quick build and verify that new code has not harmed the project.
To provide a daily snapshot of the project, we can configure the server to build the project at a specified time each day, running all post-build unit tests and quality tools.
The goal is to have a daily stable build that has passed all unit tests and quality requirements and a simpler continuous one to help identify errors.
A central Subversion server manages different versions of files/projects, while developers connect to the server via command line or GUI tools to commit their changes to the code.
For more information on Subversion, visit the project's home page at http://subversion.apache.org/
For the needs of the book, we will only use basic commands to import a project into Subversion and commit changes to files.
To learn more about Subversion, download the free book Version Control with Subversion from http://svnbook.red-bean.com/ or visit Apache's Subversion documentation page at http://subversion.apache.
Next, we will install the Subversion server and its client on Linux and Windows.
To install both the Subversion server and client, open a terminal and enter the following commands:
WANdisco provides one release to cover all Red Hat versions and requires registration, while SummerSoft hosts multiple rpm packages and does not require registration.
To install Redhat's standard Subversion package, open the terminal and enter the following command as root:
If you don't have Apache installed already, this command also installs it.
To install the SummerSoft release, visit http://the.earth.li/pub/subversion/ summersoft.fay.ar.us/pub/subversion/latest/, select the directory with the highest version number, and download and install the rpm package for your Red Hat distribution.
To install WANdisco's release go to http://www.wandisco.com/subversion/ download#redhat and click on the Download Subversion Installer link.
Then, open a terminal and enter the following commands as root:
If you wish to update your installation, you can at any time use the yum update command:
Installing Subversion on other Linux distributions If you wish to install Subversion on a Linux distribution not covered here, visit Apache's official page for a comprehensive list and installation instructions on all supported Subversion binary packages at http://subversion.apache.org/
Click on the Download button to register for a CollabNet account and when the download is complete, run the installer.
After the installation process has finished, you will have a new Subversion service running, ready to host repositories.
Setting up a Subversion server Next, we will create a repository for our projects, configure a user named svnpackt to have access to the repository, and import a dummy Maven project named packt-app into the repository.
Creating a Subversion repository A Subversion repository is simply a directory in the filesystem containing repository configuration files and our project's files.
To create a repository, open a terminal and enter the following command:
To verify the creation of the repository, navigate to $PATH_REPO.
Subversion security and authorization Subversion supports different authorization schemes, with the simplest one being password-file-based authentication.
User names and passwords are stored in a passwd file stored inside the repository's conf directory.
Navigate to the $PATH_REPO/conf directory, open the svnserve.conf file, and uncomment.
If SASL is enabled (see below), this file will NOT be used.
Uncomment the line below to use the default password file.
To create the user svnpackt with password svnpackt, open the passwd file inside.
Importing a project into Subversion To create a simple Maven project, open the terminal and enter the following command:
Notice that the previous command is a single line broken down with backslashes only for formatting purposes.
You should enter it as one line, omitting the backslashes.
Maven will start downloading the necessary archetype definition files, and eventually you will be prompted to choose the version of the quickstart Maven archetype to use:
When prompted for version, type 1.0 and then hit Enter.
Maven has created the packt-app project directory along with all necessary directories.
Before we import the project into Subversion, we must create a packt-app directory within the repository.
To do this, enter the following commands—the first one is to start the Subversion server in case it is not running.
Remember to replace the $PATH_REPO variable with the real location of the repository in your system.
Next, open a terminal and change directory (cd) to one level up from where the packt-app directory was created earlier by Maven.
You should be able to list the directory by typing ls in Linux or dir in Windows.
Then, enter the following command to import the project into Subversion:
Now that the packt-app project is stored into the Subversion repository, we can delete the local copy and check it out again directly from the server.
Open the terminal, change directory (cd) to where you want to check out the project, and enter the following command:
Whenever you want to commit changes or execute Subversion commands regarding the project, open a terminal within the project's directory and enter them from there.
For example, invoking svn with the info parameter inside the packt-app directory lists the following information:
Installing the Jenkins CI server The Jenkins Continuous Integration server, formerly known as Hudson before the renaming of the project took place, has been created by Kohsuke Kawaguchi.
The official site of the project is available at http://jenkins-ci.org/
At the end of the installation process, you will have a running Jenkins server at http://localhost:8080/
Ubuntu/Debian Jenkins installation Enter the following command to add the necessary key for the Jenkins Debian.
Alternatively, you can run the Synaptic Package Manager tool and select Repositories from the Settings menu.
Select the Third-Party Software tab and click on the Add button to enter the repository's APT line.
Finally, open a terminal and enter the following commands to perform the installation:
When the installation process completes, navigate to http://localhost:8080/ to verify that Jenkins is up and running.
As for the Jenkins service, it is good to know that:
Jenkins will be launched as a daemon up on start.
For more information, visit Jenkins's Ubuntu installation wiki at https://wiki.
Redhat/Fedora/CentOS Jenkins installation To use the Jenkins rpm repository, open a terminal and enter the following commands:
When the installation process completes, navigate to http://localhost:8080/ to verify that Jenkins is up and running.
Jenkins will be launched as a daemon up on start.
Windows Jenkins installation Download and run the Jenkins installer from http://mirrors.jenkins-ci.
To start/stop it manually, use the service manager from the control panel, or the sc command-line tool.
When the installation process completes, navigate to http://localhost:8080/ to verify that Jenkins is up and running.
Configuring Jenkins Ensure that the Jenkins service is running and go to http://localhost:8080/
From there, click on the Manage Jenkins link on the left menu to view the list of links leading to different configuration pages.
Click on the top one, Configure System, to navigate to the configuration dashboard.
This dashboard features many different sections which we will configure one by one.
If your installed JDK has not been auto-detected by Jenkins, you have to enter it manually in the Name field.
Unless, of course, you want Jenkins to install JDK automatically for you, in which case you check the Install automatically checkbox.
Maven configuration Click on the Add Maven button and fill in the Name and MAVEN_HOME fields to match your own Maven installation.
Alternatively, you can check the Install automatically checkbox and have Jenkins install it automatically from Apache.
Repository configuration Next, configure the Subversion section as shown in the following screen:
E-mail server configuration Jenkins supports user notification on various build events such as build failed or build restored.
To enable the notification support, you have to configure the SMTP server and SMPT authentication if applicable—check your e-mail server settings before making changes to this section.
The Sender E-mail Address field value will be the address Jenkins will use to e-mail users.
Securing Jenkins By default, Jenkins is open for use and configuration by anyone, requiring no authentication.
Scroll up to the top and check the Enable Security checkbox to expand the security configuration section.
From Security Realm, select Jenkins's own user database and if you wish, check the Allow users to sign up checkbox.
Click on the Matrix-based security radio button, type packt in the User/group to add input field, and click on the Add button.
On the new row, check all the privileges to make sure that this user has rights to everything.
Finally, click on the Save button to preserve configuration changes and click again on the top-left Jenkins logo to return home.
Do not log in, click on the Create Account link instead, and fill in the form with your account details entering packt as the username.
Afterwards, you will be able to log in with your packt account normally.
Creating a build job Next, we will create a new build job for the packt-app Maven project.
Log in to Jenkins and click on the New Job link from the left.
Enter a job name and select the maven2/3 radio button.
Then, click on OK to proceed to the job's configuration screen.
Click on the Subversion radio button and enter the Repository URL of the packt project.
Remember to replace the $PATH_REPO environment variable with the repository directory as it is configured in your own system.
Leave the rest of the fields to their default values.
Configure the Build Triggers section as shown in the following screenshot:
Click on the question mark beside the Poll SCM field for more configuration options.
Cron expression and scheduling Cron is a time-based job scheduler in Unix operating systems that allows you to schedule jobs using expressions.
A cron expression is a string of five fields with each field representing a different unit of time as follows:
Finally, click on the Save button and navigate back to the Jenkins home page by clicking on the top-left logo.
Your new job now appears in the job list at the center of the page.
To reconfigure the job, click on Configure from the menu on the left.
Installing the Sonar plugin Before we test our new job, let's install the Sonar plugin.
The Sonar plugin enables Jenkins to initiate a Sonar analysis after each build.
From the Jenkins home page http://localhost:8080/, click on the Manage Jenkins link, and Manage Plugins from the next screen.
Click on the Available tab and search (Ctrl + F) for Sonar to find and select the Sonar plugin.
Then, click on the Install without restart button to start the installation process.
While Jenkins is downloading and installing the plugin, make sure to check the Restart Jenkins option as shown in the following screenshot.
This will ensure that Jenkins restarts immediately once the installation is complete.
With the Sonar plugin installed, go to Manage Jenkins | Configure System and scroll down to the Sonar section.
Provide a name for the Sonar server and click on Save.
If the Sonar server is installed at a URL other than the default one (http://localhost:9000/), click on the Advanced...
Next, we will enable the Sonar analysis as a post-build action for our packt-app job.
Go back to the Jenkins home page and from the job list, select the packt-app job by clicking on its name.
Click on Configure from the left menu and scroll down to the bottom of the page.
Check the Sonar checkbox from the Post-build Actions section to enable Sonar analysis.
Hover over the question mark icons for information on the rest of the options—archive the build artifact, build other dependent projects, install the artifact to a Maven artifact repository, and so on.
Additionally, you can enable E-mail Notification and provide a list of user's e-mails to notify whenever a build event is triggered by this build job.
Finally, click on Save to preserve your changes and return to the job's dashboard.
Building and monitoring your project To test our new job, go to the Jenkins homepage at http://localhost:8080/ and click on the play button, as shown in the following screenshot, to execute the building process.
The Build Executor Status panel on the left of the page displays the progress of the build.
You can click on the build number and then on the Console Output link on the left to inspect the build log as it runs.
Notice that after the build completes, a Sonar analysis is triggered and executed.
Once the build has finished successfully, the status of the job turns blue.
Click on the project's name to navigate to the details page.
From here, you can access all past build data, download build artifacts, and review test results.
Click on the Workspace link to download artifacts and review the build logs.
Click the Sonar link to go straight to the project's Sonar dashboard:
Summary In this chapter, we went through the process of setting up and configuring an integrated build and quality analysis environment.
We configured Jenkins to poll the source code repository and execute a build process and Sonar analysis whenever changes are detected.
From now on, every time a developer commits a change to the repository, a new build and Sonar analysis will be available.
Sonar Metrics Index This appendix lists all Sonar metrics in separate categories along with a brief description for each metric and information on where to locate it within the Sonar user interface.
Sonar metrics Sonar metrics are categorized into the following categories:
Complexity metrics Complexity metrics are available in the Complexity and Quality Index widgets in the dashboard.
Martin have not been implemented yet; however, there is an open ticket by the Sonar development team at http://jira.codehaus.org/browse/SONAR-94
Afferent couplings Number of other classes that use this class.
Efferent couplings Number of classes that are used by this class.
File dependencies to cut Total number of dependencies between files.
Instability The number of classes inside a package that depend on classes outside the package.
Metric name Definition Sonar component Lack of cohesion of methods (LCOM4)
Correlation between the methods and the local instance variables of a class.
Methods not related to local fields increase the class LCOM number by one.
Number of Children (NOC) Number of descendants of the class.
Package cycles The minimum number of while traversing a package to identify dependencies.
Package dependencies to cut Total number of dependencies between packages.
Response For Class (RFC) Total number of methods that can be potentially executed by an object of this class counting distinct calls made by the methods in the class.
Documentation metrics Documentation-related metrics are available via the Comments and Duplications widget.
Empty comment lines, header file comments, and commented-out lines of code are not included.
Duplication metrics Duplication metrics are available via the Comments and Duplications widget and the Useless Code Tracker is available as a plugin.
Metric name Definition Sonar component Duplicated blocks Number of comment lines / (lines.
Useless code Total number of lines that can potentially be reduced via refactoring.
In differential mode, the widget reports only on new/updated code, as you can see in the following screenshot:
In the following table, the Sonar Component column is omitted because all metrics are available from the same widget—the Code Coverage widget.
Metric name Definition Branch Coverage Percentage value of covered branches in program flow.
Coverage Percentage value of total coverage combining line and branch.
Line Coverage Percentage value of number of lines executed/covered in unit.
Lines to cover Total number of uncovered LOCs in unit tests.
New branch coverage As Branch Coverage but only for new/updated code.
New branches to cover Total number of uncovered branches only in new/updated.
New line coverage As Line Coverage but only for new/updated code.
New lines to cover As Lines to cover but only for new/updated code.
Uncovered branches Total number of branches not covered by unit tests.
Uncovered lines Total number of lines of code that are not covered by unit.
New uncovered branches As Uncovered branches to cover but only for new/updated.
New uncovered lines As Uncovered lines to cover but only for new/updated code.
Unit test failures Number of unit tests that failed with an unhandled exception.
Unit tests duration Total duration of unit tests' execution time.
The formula for the Coverage metric as implemented by the Sonar development team is:
Rules Compliance metrics You can review Rules and Violations metrics from the project dashboard by using the default Rules Compliance widget and Useless Code Tracker with Quality Index widgets available as plugins.
Notice that the widgets report on new violations and metric values when in differential mode for new/updated code.
Weighted Violations Total sum of weighted violations (number of violations * weight value)
New Violations Total number of violations in new code only.
Potential Dead Code Total lines of code in unused protected methods.
Quality Index on Coding violations calculated is by the formula:
Quality Index on Checkstyle violations is calculated by the formula:
Size metrics The following metrics are displayed in the Size widget from the project dashboard.
On the left-hand side of the widget there is information on line levels and statements, while on the right-hand side of the widget there is information on packages and classes.
Metric name Definition Accessors Number of getter and setter methods.
Classes Number of classes including nested classes, interfaces, enums, and.
Lines of code Number of physical lines of code excluding blanks, comments, and.
The statements counter gets incremented by one each time one of the following is encountered: expression, if, else, while, do, for, switch, break, continue, return, throw, synchronized, catch, and finally.
Management metrics The next three metrics are business oriented and you can add them to the Custom Measures widget.
Business Value An indication of the value of the project to the business.
Documented API metric  14 Dodgy code rules, potential bugs violations.
About Packt Publishing Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks.
Our solution based books give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using to get the job done.
Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have seen in the past.
Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike.
This book is part of the Packt Open Source brand, home to books published on software built around Open Source licences, and offering information to anybody from advanced developers to budding web designers.
The Open Source brand also runs Packt's Open Source Royalty Scheme, by which Packt gives a royalty to each Open Source project about whose software a book is sold.
Writing for Packt We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring.
If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our commissioning editors will get in touch with you.
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some additional reward for your expertise.
Test your web applications with multiple browsers using the Selenium Framework to ensure the quality of web applications.
Save your valuable time by using Selenium to record, tweak and replay your test scripts.
Get rid of any bugs deteriorating the quality of your web applications.
Take your web applications one step closer to perfection using Selenium tests.
Packed with detailed working examples that illustrate the techniques and tools for debugging.
Over 80 recipes to maintain, secure, communicate, test, build, and improve the software development process with Jenkins.
Explore the use of more than 40 best of breed plugins.
Use code quality metrics, integration testing through functional and performance testing to measure the quality of your software.
Get a problem-solution approach enriched with code examples for practical and easy comprehension.
Implement engineering practices in your application development process with Apache Maven.
Create professional desktop rich-client Swing applications using the world's only modular Swing application framework.
Master a broad range of topics essential to have in your desktop application development toolkit, right from conceptualization to distribution.
Pursue an easy-to-follow sequential and tutorial approach that builds to a complete Swing application.
Starting Sonar as a service Run as a service on Linux Run as a service on Windows.
Logging in to Sonar for the first time Securing your Sonar instance Sonar authentication and sources visibility.
Backing up your data Sonar instance configuration backup Filesystem backup Backing up the MySQL sonar database.
Browsing the Sonar web interface The treemap gadget Filtering your projects The "What Coverage?" filter.
Eliminating your first violations Unused modifier violation Modified Order violation Correctness - Repeated conditional tests.
Chapter 4: Following Coding Standards A brief overview of coding standards and conventions Java standards.
Managing quality profiles Creating a profile Associating projects to profiles.
Managing rules Adding a rule Configuring a rule Regular expressions Boolean expressions Token and value-based rules.
Creating a coding standards profile Selecting the rules Naming conventions and declarations rules Declaration order Abstract class name Variable, parameter, and method names Multiple variable declarations Local home naming Variable lengths Naming - Avoid field name matching method name Naming - Suspicious equals method name.
Standards rules Unused imports Unnecessary final modifier Unused modifier Magic number Final class Missing constructor Abstract class without any methods.
Inspecting violations with the Radiator component Installing the Radiator plugin.
Quality reporting on your project Installing the PDF report plugin Getting the project report Customizing the report.
Chapter 6: Hunting Potential Bugs Potential bugs violations Dodgy code rules Use notifyAll instead of notify StringBuffer instantiation with char Use StringBuffer for String appends Constructor calls overridable method Close Resource Ambiguous invocation of either an inherited or outer method Consider returning a zero length array rather than null Method ignores return value Method does not release lock on all paths Null pointer dereference Suspicious reference comparison Misplaced null check Impossible cast.
Program flow rules Do not throw exception in finally Finalize does not call Super Finalize Avoid calling finalize Avoid catching NPE Method ignores exceptional return value Switch statement found where default case is missing Missing break in switch Avoid catching Throwable.
Security rules Class exposes synchronization and semaphores in its public interface Method returns internal array Hardcoded constant database password.
Locating duplicated code with Sonar Cross-project duplication detection Using the Radiator component to detect duplication.
Using extraction and inheritance to attack duplication The Extract Method refactoring pattern Refactoring With inheritance.
Assessing the impact of your tests Uncovered lines Uncovered branches.
Using the coverage tag cloud component Quick wins mode Top risk mode Where to start testing The Top risk approach.
Setting up a Subversion server Creating a Subversion repository Subversion security and authorization Importing a project into Subversion.
