No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the information presented.
However, the information contained in this book is sold without warranty, either express or implied.
Neither the author, nor Packt Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals.
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
Hubert Klein Ikkink was born in 1973 and lives in Tilburg, the Netherlands, with his beautiful wife and gorgeous children.
He is also known as mrhaki, which is simply the initials of his name prepended by mr.
After finishing his studies he started to work at a company which specialized in knowledge-based software.
Over the years his focus switched from applets, to servlets, to Java Enterprise Edition applications, to Spring-based software.
In 2008 he wanted to have fun again when writing software.
The larger projects he was working on were more about writing configuration XML files, tuning performance and less about real development in his eyes.
So he started to look around and noticed Groovy as a good language to learn about.
He could still use existing Java code, libraries, and his Groovy classes in Java.
The learning curve isn’t steep and to support his learning phase he wrote down interesting Groovy facts in his blog with the title Groovy Goodness.
He posts small articles with a lot of code samples to understand how to use Groovy.
This is a very good conference with all the project leaders of Groovy and Groovy-related projects.
The conference is visited by 1000 Java developers and he got the chance to educate some of them about the greatness of Gradle and Groovy.
Hubert works for a company called JDriven in the Netherlands.
JDriven focuses on technologies that simplify and improve development of enterprise applications.
Employees of JDriven have years of experience with Java and related technologies and are all eager to learn about new technologies.
Hubert works on projects using Grails and Java combined with Groovy and Gradle.
It was a great honor to be asked by Packt Publishing to write this book.
I knew beforehand it would be a lot of work and somehow needed to be combined with my daytime job.
I couldn’t have written the book without the help of a lot of people and I would like to thank them.
First of all I would like to thank my family for supporting me while writing this book.
They gave me space and time to write the book.
Thank you for your patience and a big kiss for Kim, Britt, and Liam; I love you.
They reviewed the pages I wrote and helped me by asking questions and showing interest in the progress of the book.
Of course I like to thank all the people at Gradleware for making Gradle such a great build tool and René Gröschke for reviewing the chapters in the book.
Finally I’d like to thank the great staff at Packt Publishing.
Sai Gamare kept me on schedule and made sure everything was submitted on time.
I’d also like to thank all the editors for reviewing the book.
They really helped me to keep focus and be concise with the text.
René Gröschke has been working as a Software Engineer for more than eight years now.
He has worked on several international projects and regularly shares his passion and experience of agile methodologies and software craftsmanship with other developers at different national and international conferences or with bachelor students of the Baden-Wuerttemberg Cooperative State University (DHBW) in Germany.
Supporting Gradle and the Gradle community by providing plugins, patches, screencasts, and talks since the early days, René has turned his hobby into his occupation and is now part of the core developer team of Gradle working for Gradleware.
From time to time, he’s contributing to other open source projects, such as Macports or Griffon.
Michał Huniewicz is a Software Developer, with several years of experience in the JVM technologies.
He has been involved in projects for a variety of industries, including banking, press, finance, telecoms, and the government.
He was also the head developer of an award-winning community portal.
Apart from being an active blogger (http://blog.m1key.me/), he is a passionate photographer and traveller.
I would like to thank my parents, Rita and Andrzej, for their continued support and for having faith in me.
Williams is a developer based in Silicon Valley and a frequent international conference speaker.
Support files, eBooks, discount offers and more You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related to your book.
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy.
Get in touch with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt’s online digital book library.
Here, you can access, read and search across Packt’s entire library of books.
Free Access for Packt account holders If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books.
Not only does Gradle use convention over configuration to provide good defaults, it is also adaptable for use in every situation you encounter in daily development.
Build logic is described with a powerful DSL and empowers developers to create reusable and maintainable build logic.
We will learn about Gradle's features with code samples throughout the book.
We will learn how to write tasks, work with files, and write build scripts using the Groovy DSL.
Next, we will learn how to use Gradle in projects to compile, package, test, check code quality and deploy applications.
And finally, we will see how to integrate Gradle with continuous integration servers and development environments (IDEs)
After reading this book, we will know how to use Gradle in our daily development.
We can write tasks, apply plugins, and write build logic using the Gradle build language.
What this book covers Chapter 1, Starting with Gradle, introduces Gradle and explains how to install Gradle.
We will write our first Gradle script and learn about the command-line and GUI features of Gradle.
Chapter 2, Creating Gradle Build Scripts, looks at tasks as part of the Gradle build scripts.
We will see how we can define tasks and use task dependencies to describe build logic.
Chapter 3, Working with Gradle Build Scripts, covers more functionality that we can apply in Gradle scripts.
We will learn how to work with files and directories, apply logging to our build scripts, and use properties to parameterize our build scripts.
Gradle offers several tasks and configuration conventions that make working with Java projects very easy.
We will see how we can customize the configuration for projects that cannot follow the conventions.
Chapter 5, Dependency Management, covers the support for dependencies by Gradle.
We will learn how to use configurations to organize dependencies.
We will also see how we can use repositories with dependencies in our build scripts.
Chapter 6, Testing, Building, and Publishing Artifacts, is an introduction to Gradle support for running tests from the build script.
We will learn how we can build several artifacts for a project and publish the artifacts to a repository so other developers can reuse our code.
Chapter 7, Multi-project Builds, covers Gradle's support for multi-project builds.
With Gradle, we can easily configure multiple projects that are related to each other.
We will also see how Gradle can automatically build related or dependent projects if necessary.
Chapter 8, Mixed Languages, is about the Scala and Groovy plugins that are included with Gradle, to work with projects that have Scala or Groovy code.
We will see how we can use and configure the plugins to include code analysis in our build process.
Chapter 10, Writing Custom Tasks and Plugins, covers what we need to do to write our own custom tasks and plugins.
We will see how we can decouple the definition and usage of a custom task and plugin into separate source files.
We will also learn how we can reuse our custom tasks and plugins in other projects.
Chapter 11, Using Gradle with Continuous Integration, is an introduction to the support of several continuous integration tools for Gradle.
We will learn how we can configure a continuous integration server to automatically invoke our Gradle build scripts.
We will also see how the IDEs support Gradle from within the IDE to run (for example) tasks, and keep track of dependencies defined in Gradle scripts.
What you need for this book In order to work with Gradle and the code samples in the book, we need at least a Java Development Kit (JDK 1.5 or higher), Gradle, and a good text editor.
In Chapter 1, Starting with Gradle, we will see how we can install Gradle on our computer.
Who this book is for This book is for you if you work on Java (Scala or Groovy) applications and want to use build automation to compile, package, and deploy your application automatically.
You might have worked with other build automation tools such as Maven or ANT, but this is not necessary to understand the topics in this book.
Conventions In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between different kinds of information.
Here are some examples of these styles, and an explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "In our first build we only have one task, so the command gradle h should work just fine."
When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block, the relevant lines or items are set in bold:
Words that you see on the screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "We select the plugin and click on the button Install without restart"
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Let us know what you think about this book—what you liked or may have disliked.
Reader feedback is important for us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a book that you need and would like to see us publish, please send us a note in the SUGGEST A TITLE form on www.packtpub.com or e-mail suggest@ packtpub.com.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to help you to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the example code You can download the example code files for all Packt books you have purchased from your account at http://www.PacktPub.com.
If you purchased this book elsewhere, you can visit http://www.PacktPub.com/support and register to have the files e-mailed directly to you.
Errata Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do happen.
By doing so, you can save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this book.
If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
Once your errata are verified, your submission will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title.
Any existing errata can be viewed by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media.
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously.
If you come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you valuable content.
Questions You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.
Starting with Gradle When we develop software, we write code, compile code, test our code, package our code, and finally, distribute the code.
We can automate these steps by using a build system.
The big advantage is that we have a repeatable sequence of steps.
Each time, the build system will follow the steps we have defined, so we can concentrate on writing the actual code and not worry about the other steps.
In this chapter, we will explain what Gradle is and how to use it in our development projects.
With Gradle, we can automate the compiling, testing, packaging, and deployment of our software or other types of projects.
Gradle is flexible but has sensible defaults for most projects.
This means we can rely on the defaults, if we don't want something special, but can still use the flexibility to adapt a build to certain custom needs.
Gradle is already used by big open source projects, such as Spring, Hibernate, and Grails.
Declarative builds and convention over configuration Gradle uses a Domain Specific Language (DSL) based on Groovy to declare builds.
The DSL provides a flexible language that can be extended by us.
Because the DSL is based on Groovy, we can write Groovy code to describe a build and use the power and expressiveness of the Groovy language.
Groovy is a language for the Java Virtual Machine (JVM), such as Java and Scala.
Groovy makes it easy to work with collections, has closures, and has a lot of useful features.
In fact, we could write a Groovy class file with Java syntax and it would compile.
But, using the Groovy syntax makes it easier to express the code intent, and we need less boilerplate code than with Java.
To get the most out of Gradle, it is best to learn the basics of the Groovy language, but it is not necessary to start writing Gradle scripts.
Gradle is designed to be a build language and not a rigid framework.
The Gradle core itself is written in Java and  Groovy.
To extend Gradle we can use Java and Groovy to write our custom code.
We can even write our custom code in Scala if we want to.
Gradle provides support for Java, Groovy, Scala, Web, and OSGi projects, out of the box.
These projects have sensible convention over configuration settings that we probably already use ourselves.
But we have the flexibility to change these configuration settings, if needed, in our projects.
Support for Ant tasks and Maven repositories Gradle supports Ant tasks and projects.
We can import an Ant build and re-use all the tasks.
But we can also write Gradle tasks dependent on Ant tasks.
The integration also applies to properties, paths, and so on.
Maven and Ivy repositories are supported to publish or fetch dependencies.
So, we can continue to use any repository infrastructure we already have.
This means tasks in a build are only executed if necessary.
For example, a task to compile source code will first check whether the sources since the last execution of the task have changed.
If the sources have changed, the task is executed, but if the sources haven't changed, the execution of the task is skipped and the task is marked as being up to date.
Gradle supports this mechanism for a lot of the provided tasks.
But we can also use this for tasks we write ourselves.
A project can simply be dependent on other projects or be a dependency for other projects.
We can define a graph of dependencies between projects, and Gradle can resolve those dependencies for us.
We have the flexibility to define our project layout as we want.
This means Gradle will figure out if a project that our project depends on needs to be rebuilt or not.
And if the project needs rebuilding, Gradle will do this before building our own project.
Gradle wrapper The Gradle wrapper allows us to execute Gradle builds, even though Gradle is not installed on a computer.
This is a great way to distribute source code and provide the build system with it, so that the source code can be built.
Also, in an enterprise environment, we can have a zero administration way for client computers to build the software.
We can use the wrapper to enforce a certain Gradle version to be used, so the whole team is using the same version.
Free and open source Gradle is an open source project and it is licensed under the Apache Software License (ASL)
Getting started In this section, we will download and install Gradle before writing our first Gradle build script.
Before we get and install Gradle, we must make sure we have a Java Development Kit (JDK) installed on our computer.
Gradle will use the JDK found at the path set on our computer.
We can check this by running the following command on the command line:
Although Gradle uses Groovy, we don't have to install Groovy ourselves.
Gradle bundles the Groovy libraries with the distribution and will ignore a Groovy installation already available on our computer.
From this page we can download the latest release of Gradle.
Or, we can download a previous version if we want to.
We can download either the complete Gradle distribution, with binaries, sources, and documentation, or only the binaries, or only the sources.
To get started with Gradle, we download the standard distribution with the binaries, sources, and documentation.
At the time of writing this book, the current release is Debian package.
Installing Gradle Gradle is packaged as a ZIP file for one of the three distributions.
So, when we have downloaded the Gradle full distribution ZIP file, we must unzip the file.
Binaries in the bin directory • Documentation with the user guide, Groovy DSL, and the API.
Once we have unpacked the Gradle distribution to a directory, we can open a command prompt.
We change the directory to bin, which we extracted from the ZIP file.
To check our installation, we run gradle -v and we get output, listing the JDK used and the library versions of Gradle:
Here we can check whether the displayed version is the same as the distribution version we have downloaded from the Gradle website.
To run Gradle on our computer we only have to add $GRADLE_HOME/bin to our PATH environment variable.
Once we have done that, we can run the gradle command from every directory on our computer.
The former is a commonly used environment variable name to pass extra parameters to a Java application.
Similarly, Gradle uses the GRADLE_OPTS environment variable to pass extra arguments to Gradle.
Both environment variables are used so we can set them both with different values.
This is mostly used to set, for example, an HTTP proxy or extra memory options.
Writing our first build script We now have a running Gradle installation.
It is time to create our first Gradle build script.
Gradle uses the concept of projects to define a related set of tasks.
A project is a very broad concept in Gradle, but it is mostly a set of components we want to build for our application.
Tasks are a unit of work that need to be executed by the build.
Examples of tasks are compiling source code, packaging class files into a JAR file, running tests, or deploying the application.
We now know that a task is part of a project, so to create our first task we also create our first Gradle project.
Gradle will look for a file named build.gradle in the current directory.
We define those of our tasks that need to be executed in this build script file.
We create a new file, build.gradle, and open it in a text editor.
We type the following code to define our first Gradle task:
The task will print the words "Hello world." to the console.
A closure is a code block that can be assigned to a variable or passed to a method.
And because Gradle uses Groovy to define the build scripts, we can use closures in our build scripts.
The << syntax is, technically speaking, operator shorthand for the method want to add the closure (with the statement println 'Hello world.') to our task with the name helloWorld.
First we save build.gradle, and then with the command gradle helloWorld, we execute our build:
The first line of output shows our line Hello world.
Gradle adds some more output, such as the fact that the build was successful and the total time of the build.
Because Gradle runs in the JVM, it must be started each time we run a Gradle build.
We can run the same build again, but with only the output of our task, by using the Gradle command-line option --quiet (or -q)
When we use --quiet (or -q), we get the following output:
Default Gradle tasks We created our simple build script with one task.
We can ask Gradle to show us the available tasks for our project.
We type gradle -q tasks to see the tasks for our project:
To see all tasks and more detail, run with --all.
Here, we see our task helloWorld in the Other tasks section.
The Gradle built-in tasks are displayed in the Help tasks section.
For example, to see some general help information, we execute the help task:
To see a list of available tasks, run gradle tasks.
To see a list of command-line options, run gradle --help.
The properties task is very useful to see the properties available to our project.
We haven't defined any property ourselves in the build script, but Gradle provides a lot of built-in properties.
The dependencies task will show dependencies (if any) for our project.
Our first project doesn't have any dependencies when we run the task, as the output shows:
The projects task will display sub-projects (if any) for a root project.
So when we run the task projects, the output shows us that our project has no sub-projects.
To see a list of the tasks of a project, run gradle <project-path>:tasks.
Task name abbreviation Before we look at more Gradle command-line options, it is good to learn about a real timesaving feature of Gradle: task name abbreviation.
With task name abbreviation, we don't have to type the complete task name on the command line.
We only have to type enough of the name to make it unique within the build.
In our first build we only have one task, so the command gradle h should work just fine.
But then, we didn't take into account the built-in task help.
So, to uniquely identify our helloWorld task, we use the abbreviation hello:
We can also abbreviate each word in a camel case task name.
For example, our task name helloWorld can be abbreviated to hW:
This feature saves us the time spent in typing the complete task name and can speed up the execution of our tasks.
Executing multiple tasks With just a simple build script, we already learned that we have a couple of default tasks besides our own task that we can execute.
To execute multiple tasks we only have to add each task name to the command line.
Let's execute our custom task helloWorld and the built-in task tasks, as follows:
To see all tasks and more detail, run with --all.
When executed, we see the task names prepended with a colon (:) and the output on the following lines.
Gradle executes the tasks in the same order as they are defined on the command line.
Gradle will execute a task only once during the build.
So even if we define the same task multiple times, it will be executed only once.
This rule also applies when tasks have dependencies on other tasks.
Gradle will optimize the task execution for us, and we don't have to worry about that.
Command-line options The gradle command is used to execute a build.
We know the option --quiet (or -q) to reduce the output of a build.
If we use the option --help (or -h or -?), we see the complete list of options:
C, --cache             Specifies how compiled build scripts should be cached.
P, --project-prop      Set project property for the build script (e.g.
S, --full-stacktrace   Print out the full (very verbose) stacktrace for all exceptions.
Logging options Let's look at some of the options in more detail.
The options --quiet (or -q), --debug (or -d), --info (or -i), --stacktrace (or -s), and --full-stacktrace (or -S) control the amount of output we see when we execute tasks.
To get the most detailed output we use the option --debug (or -d)
This option provides a lot of output with information about the steps and classes used to run the build.
The output is very verbose, therefore we will not use it much.
To get a better insight into the steps that are executed for our task, we can use the --info (or -i) option.
The output is not as verbose as with --debug, but it can give a better understanding of the build steps:
Task ':helloWorld' has not declared any outputs, assuming that it is out-of-date.
If our build throws exceptions, we can see the stack trace information with the options --stacktrace (or -s) and --full-stacktrace (or -S)
The latter option will output the most information and is the most verbose.
The options --stacktrace and --full-stracktrace can be combined with the other logging options.
Changing the build file and directory We created our build file with the name build.gradle.
Gradle will look for a file with this name in the current directory, to execute the build.
But we can change this with the command-line options --build-file (or -b) and --project-dir (or -p)
Let's run the Gradle command from the parent directory of our current directory:
And we can also rename build.gradle to, for example, hello.build and still execute our build:
Running tasks without execution With the option --dry-run (or -m), we can run all the tasks without really executing them.
When we use the dry run option, we can see which tasks are executed, so we get an insight into which tasks are involved in a certain build scenario.
And we don't have to worry if the tasks are actually executed.
Gradle builds up a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) with all the tasks before any task is executed.
The DAG is built so that tasks will be executed in order of dependencies and so that a task is executed only once.
Gradle daemon We already learned that Gradle is executed in a Java Virtual Machine, and each time we invoke the gradle command, a new Java Virtual Machine is started, the Gradle classes and libraries are loaded, and the build is executed.
We can reduce the build execution time if we don't have to load a JVM, Gradle classes, and libraries, each time we execute a build.
The command-line option, --daemon, starts a new Java process that will have all Gradle classes and libraries already loaded, and then we execute the build.
The next time when we run Gradle with the --daemon option, only the build is executed, because the JVM, with the required Gradle classes and libraries, is already running.
The first time we execute gradle with the --daemon option, the execution speed will not  improve, because the Java background process has not started as yet.
But the next time around, we will see a major improvement:
Even though the daemon process has started, we can still run Gradle tasks without using the daemon.
We use the command-line option --no-daemon to run a Gradle build without utilizing the daemon:
To stop the daemon process, we use the command-line option --stop:
To always use the --daemon command-line option, without typing it every time we run the gradle command, we can create an alias—if our operating system supports aliases.
For example, on a Unix-based system we can create an alias and then use the alias to run the Gradle build:
Instead of using the --daemon command-line option, we can use the Java system property org.gradle.daemon to enable the daemon.
We can add this property to environment variable GRADLE_OPTS, so that it is always used when we run a Gradle build.
This option records the time that certain tasks take to complete.
The data is saved in an HTML file in the directory build/reports/profile.
We can open this file in a web browser and see the time taken for several phases in the build process.
The following image shows the HTML contents of the profile report:
Understanding the Gradle user interface Finally, we take a look at the --gui command-line option.
With this option, we start a graphical shell for our Gradle builds.
Until now, we have used the command line to start a task.
With the Gradle GUI, we have a graphical overview of the tasks in a project, and we can execute them by simply double-clicking on them.
A window is opened with a graphical overview of our task tree.
We have only one task, which is listed in the task tree, as shown in the following screenshot:
The output of a running task is shown in the bottom part of the window.
When we start the GUI for the first time, the tasks task is executed and we see the output in the window.
Task Tree The Task Tree tab shows projects and tasks found in our build project.
We can execute a task by double-clicking on the task name.
By default all tasks are shown, but we can apply a filter to show or hide certain projects and tasks.
The Filter button opens a new dialog window where we can define which tasks and properties are part of the filter.
The Toggle filter button makes the filter active or inactive.
We can also right-click on the project and task names.
This opens a context menu where we can choose whether to execute the task, add it to the favorites, hide it (adds it to the filter), or edit the build file.
If we click on Edit File, and if the .gradle extension is associated with a text editor in our operating system, the editor is opened with the content of the build script.
Favorites The Favorites tab stores tasks we want to execute regularly.
We can add a task by right-clicking on the task in the Task Tree tab and selecting the Add To Favorites menu option.
Alternatively, we can open the Favorites tab,  click on the Add button and manually enter the project and task name we want to add to our favorites list.
We can see the Add Favorite dialog window in the following screenshot:
Command Line On the Command Line tab, we can enter any Gradle command we normally would enter on the command prompt.
We can see the Command Line tab contents in the following screenshot:
Here, we can change the project directory, which is set by default to the current directory.
We learned about the different logging levels as command-line options previously in this chapter.
In the GUI, we can select the logging level from the Log Level drop-down box with the different log levels.
We can choose one of Debug, Info, Lifecyle, and Error as the log levels.
The Error log level only shows errors and is the least verbose, while Debug is the most verbose log level.
Here we can also set how detailed the exception stack trace information should be.
In the section Stack Trace Output we can choose between the following three options:
Exceptions only: For showing only exceptions when they occur; this is the default value.
Standard Stack Trace: For showing more stack trace information for the exceptions.
Full Stack Trace: For the most verbose stack trace information for exceptions.
If we enable the option Only Show Output When Errors Occur, we get output from the build process only if the build fails; otherwise we don't get any output.
Finally, we can define a different way to start Gradle for the build, with the option Use Custom Gradle Executor.
For example, we can define a different batch or script file with extra setup information to run the build process.
The following screenshot shows the Setup tab page along with all the options we can set:
Summary So now, we have learned how to install Gradle on our computers.
We have written our first Gradle build script with a simple task.
We have seen how to use the tasks built-in to Gradle to get more information about a project.
We learned how to use the command-line options to help us run the build scripts.
And, we have looked at the Gradle graphical user interface and how we can use it to run Gradle build scripts.
In the next chapter we will take a further look at tasks.
We will learn how to add actions to a task.
We will write more complex tasks where tasks will depend on other tasks.
And we will learn how Gradle builds up a task graph internally and how we can use this in our projects.
A Gradle build always consists of one or more projects.
A project defines some sort of component we want to build.
There are no defining rules about what the component is.
It can be a JAR file with utility classes to be used in other projects, or a web application to be deployed to the corporate intranet.
A project doesn't have to be about building and packaging code; it can also be about doing things such as copying files to a remote server or deployment of applications to servers.
A task is a small piece of work that is executed when we run a build, for example, compiling source code, packaging code in an archive file, generating documentation, and so on.
In this chapter we will learn how to define a project with tasks and use it as a Gradle build.
Writing a build script In the first chapter we have already written our first build script.
Let's create a similar build script with a simple task.
Gradle will look for a file with the name build.gradle, in the current directory.
The file build.gradle contains the tasks that make up our project.
In this example, we define a simple task that prints out a simple message to the console:
If we run the build we see the following output in the console:
A couple of interesting things happen with this small build script.
Gradle reads the script file and creates a Project object.
The build script configures the Project object, and finally the set of tasks to be executed is determined and executed.
So, it is important to note that Gradle creates a Project object for us.
The Project object has several properties and methods, and it is available in our build scripts.
We can use the variable name project to reference the Project object, but we can also leave out this variable name to reference properties and methods of the Project object.
Gradle will automatically try to map properties and methods in the build script to the Project object.
In our simple build script we assign the value Simple project to the project property description.
We used the explicit project variable name and the Groovy property assignment syntax.
The following build script uses a different syntax to get the same result:
Here, we use the Java syntax to set and get the value of the description property of the project object.
We are very flexible in our syntax, but we will stick with the Groovy syntax for the rest of the book, because it results in more readable build scripts.
Defining tasks A project has one or more tasks to execute some actions, so a task is made up of actions.
Gradle supports several ways to add actions to our tasks.
We can use the doFirst and doLast methods to add actions to our task, and we can use the left shift operator (<<) as a synonym for the doLast method.
With the doLast method or the left shift operator (<<) we add actions at the end of the list of actions for the task.
With the doFirst method we can add actions to the beginning of the list of actions.
The following script shows how we can use the several methods:
When we run the script, we get the following output:
For the task second, we add the action to print out text with the doLast method.
The task object is passed to the closure as a parameter.
This means we can use the task object in our actions.
In the sample build file, we get the value for the name property of the task and print it to the console.
Maybe it is a good time to look more closely at closures, because they are an important part of Groovy and are used throughout Gradle build scripts.
Closures are basically reusable pieces of code that can be assigned to a variable or passed to a method.
A closure is defined by enclosing the piece of code between curly brackets ({...})
If the closure has only one argument, an implicit parameter, it, can be used to reference the parameter value.
We could have written the second task as follows, and the result would still be the same:
We can also define a name for the parameter and use that name in the code.
This is what we did for the tasks second and third, wherein we named the closure parameter task and taskObject respectively.
The resulting code is more readable if we define the parameter name explicitly in our closure:
Defining actions with the Action interface Gradle often has more than one way of defining something, as we will see throughout the book.
Besides using closures to add actions to a task, we can also use a more verbose way by passing an implementation class of the org.
The following piece of code shows a reimplementation of the first task in our build script:
It is good to know that we have choices when we define actions for a task, but the closure syntax is denser and more readable.
Build scripts are Groovy code We must keep in mind that Gradle scripts use Groovy.
This means we can use all the Groovy's good stuff in our scripts.
We already saw in our sample script the use of the so-called Groovy GString.
The GString is defined as a string with double quotes and can contain references to variables defined in a ${...} section.
The variabled reference is resolved when we get the value of the GString.
But other great Groovy constructs can also be used in Gradle scripts.
And when we run the script we get the following output:
Defining dependencies between tasks Until now, we have defined tasks independent of each other.
For example, a task to package compiled class files is dependent on the task to compile the class files.
The build system should then first run the compile task, and when the task is finished, the package task must be executed.
In Gradle, we can add task dependencies with the dependsOn method for a task.
Define dependency of task second on task first second.dependsOn 'first'
Note that we define the dependency of task second on task first, in the last line.
When we run the script, we see that the first task is executed before the second task:
Another way to define the dependency between tasks is to set the dependsOn property instead of using the dependsOn method.
There is a subtle difference; Gradle just offers several ways to achieve the same result.
In the following piece of code, we use the property to define the dependency of task second.
And for task third, we immediately define the property when we define the task:
When we run task third on the command line, we see that all three tasks are executed:
We can define a dependency on a task that is defined later in the build script.
Gradle will set up all task dependencies during the configuration phase and not during the execution phase.
The following script shows that the order of the tasks doesn't matter in the build script:
But each task does the same thing—it prints out a string with the name of the task.
It is good to keep in mind that our build script is just code, and code can be organized and refactored to create cleaner code.
It is important to take a good look at your build scripts and see if things can be organized better and if code can be reused instead of repeated.
Even our simple build script can be rewritten like this:
This might seem trivial, but it is important to understand that we can apply the same coding techniques we use in our application code to our build code.
Defining dependencies via tasks In our build scripts, we defined the task dependencies using the task name.
But, there are more ways in which to define a task dependency.
We can use the task object instead of the task name to define a task dependency:
Defining dependencies via closures We can also use a closure to define the task dependencies.
The closure must return a single task name or task object, or a collection of task names or task objects.
Using this technique, we can really fine-tune the dependencies for our task.
For example, in the following build script, we define a dependency for task second on all tasks in the project with task names that have the letter "f" in the task name:
When we run the build project we get the following output:
Setting default tasks To execute a task we use the task name on the command line when we run Gradle.
So, if our build script contains a task with the name first, we can run the task with the following command:
But, we can also define a default task or multiple default tasks that need to be executed, even if we don't explicitly set the task name.
So, if we run the gradle command without arguments, the default task of our build script will be executed.
To set the default task or tasks, we use the method defaultTasks.
We pass the names of the tasks that need to be executed, to the method.
In the following build script, we make the tasks first and second the default tasks:
We can run our build script and get the following output:
Organizing tasks In Chapter 1, Starting with Gradle, we already learned that we could use the tasks task of Gradle to see which tasks are available for a build.
Let us suppose we have the following simple build script:
Task second is the default task and depends on task first.
When we run the tasks task on the command line, we get the following output:
To see all tasks and more detail, run with --all.
We see our task with the name second in the section Other tasks, but not the task with the name first.
To see all tasks, including the tasks other tasks depend on, we must add the option --all to the tasks command:
Gradle even indents the dependent tasks so we can see that the task second depends on the task first.
At the beginning of the output, we see the line:
Gradle shows us which task is the default task in our build.
Adding a description to tasks To describe our task, we can set the description property of a task.
The value of the description property is used by the tasks task of Gradle.
Now when we run the tasks task, we get a more descriptive output:
Grouping tasks together With Gradle, we can also group tasks together in so-called task groups.
A task group is a set of tasks that belong together logically.
The task group is used, for example, in the output of the tasks task we used earlier.
Let's expand our sample build script by grouping the two tasks together in a sample task group.
We must assign a value to the group property of a task:
Next time when we run the tasks task, we can see our tasks grouped together in a section Base tasks:
Note that the task dependency is appended to the description property of task second.
Adding tasks in other ways Until now, we have added tasks to our build project using the task keyword followed by the name of the task.
But there are more ways to add tasks to our project.
We can use a string value with the task name to define a new task:
We can also use variable expressions to define a new task.
If doing so, we must use parentheses, because otherwise the expression cannot be resolved.
The following sample script defines a variable simpleTask with the string value simple.
The result is that our project now contains a task with the name simple:
We can run the tasks task to see our newly created task:
We can also use the power of Groovy to add new tasks.
We can use Groovy's GString notation to dynamically create a task name.
It is just like using expressions in the previous sample, but expressed in a Groovy GString:
If we run the tasks task, we can see we have four new tasks:
Another way to add a new task is through the tasks property of a project.
Remember that, in our build script, we have access to the Project object.
Either we use the project variable explicitly, or we use methods and properties of the Project object implicitly, without using the project variable.
The tasks property of a project is basically a container for all tasks in our project.
In the following build script, we use the add method to add a new task:
Using task rules We have seen how we can add tasks dynamically to our build project.
These rules are very flexible and allow us to add tasks to our project based on several parameters and project properties.
Suppose we want to add an extra task for every task in our project that shows the description of a task.
If we have a task first in our project, we want to add a task descFirst to show the description property of the task first.
With task rules, we define a pattern for new tasks.
In our sample this is desc<TaskName>; it is the prefix desc followed by the name of the existing task.
The following build script shows the implementation of the task rule:
If we run the tasks task, we see an extra Rules section in the output:
So, we know we can invoke descFirst and descSecond for our project.
Note that those two extra tasks are not shown in the Other tasks section, but the Rules section shows the pattern we can use.
If we execute the descFirst and descSecond tasks, we get the following output:
Accessing tasks as project properties Each task that we add is also available as a Project property, and we can reference this property like we can any other property in our build script.
We can, for example, invoke methods or get and set property values of our task through the property reference.
This means we are very flexible in how we create our tasks and add behaviour to the tasks.
In the following script, we use the Project property reference to a task to change the description property:
When we run our task from the command line, we get the following output:
Adding additional properties to tasks A task object already has several properties and methods.
But we can add any arbitrary new property to a task and use it.
In the following sample, we print the value of the task property message.
When we run the task we get the following output:
Avoiding common pitfalls A common mistake when creating a task and adding actions for that task is that we forget the left shift operator (<<)
Then we are left with a valid syntax in our build script, so we don't get an error when we execute the task.
But instead of adding actions, we have configured our task.
The closure we use is then interpreted as a configuration closure.
All methods and properties in the closure are applied to the task.
We can add actions for our tasks in the configuration closure, but we must use the doFirst and doLast methods.
The following tasks do the same thing, but note the small subtle differences when we define the tasks:
This line will be displayed during configuration // and not when we execute the task, // because we use the configuration closure // and forgot the << operator.
Skipping tasks Sometimes, we want tasks to be excluded from a build.
In certain circumstances, we just want to skip a task and continue executing other tasks.
We can use several methods to skip tasks in Gradle.
Using onlyIf predicates Every task has a method onlyIf that accepts a closure as an argument.
The result of the closure must be true or false.
If the task must be skipped, the result of the closure must be false, otherwise the task is executed.
The task object is passed as a parameter to the closure.
Gradle evaluates the closure just before the task is executed.
The following build file will skip the task longrunning, if the file is executed during weekdays, but will execute it during the weekend:
If we run our build during weekdays, we get the following output:
And if we run the build during the weekend, we see that the task is executed:
We can invoke the onlyIf method multiple times for a task.
If one of the predicates returns false, the task is skipped.
Besides using a closure to define the condition that determines if the task needs to be executed or not, we can use an implementation of the org.gradle.api.specs.Spec interface.
We must write an implementation and return true if the task must be executed or false if we want the task to be skipped.
The current task object is passed as a parameter to the isSatisfiedBy method.
In the following sample we check if a file exists.
And if the file exists we can execute the task, otherwise the task is skipped:
Skipping tasks by throwing StopExecutionException Another way to the skip execution of a task is to throw a StopExecutionException exception.
If such an exception is thrown, the build will stop the current task and continue with the next task.
We can use the doFirst method to add a precondition check for a task.
In the closure, when we pass to the doFirst method, we can check for a condition and throw a StopExecutionException exception if necessary.
In the following build script, we check if the script is executed during working hours.
If so, the exception is thrown and task first is skipped:
If we run our script during working hours and look at the output of our build script, we will notice that we cannot see the task has been skipped.
If we use the onlyIf method, Gradle will add SKIPPED to a task that is not executed:
Enabling and disabling tasks We have seen how we can skip tasks with the onlyIf method or by throwing StopExecutionException.
But we can also use another method to skip a task.
By default, the value of the property is true, which means the task is enabled and is executed.
We can change the value and set it to false to disable the task and skip its execution.
In the following sample, we check for the existence of a directory, and if it exists, the enabled property is set to true, if not, it is set to false:
If we run the task and the directory doesn't exist, we get the following output:
If we run the task, and this time the directory exists, containing a single file with the name sample, we get the following output:
Skipping from the command line Until now, we have defined the rules to skip a task in the build file.
But we can use the --exclude-tasks (-x) command-line option if we run the build.
We must define, as an argument, which task we want to exclude from the tasks to be executed.
The following script has three tasks with some task dependencies:
If we run the gradle command and exclude task second, we get the following output:
If our task third didn't depend on task first, only task third would be executed.
Skipping tasks that are up-to-date Until now, we have defined conditions that are evaluated to determine whether a task needs to be skipped or not.
Suppose we have a task that works on a file and generates some output based on the file.
In the following sample build file, we have task convert that will take an XML file, parse the contents, and write data to a text file.
Each time, the data is read from the XML file and written to the text file:
But our input file hasn't changed between the task invocations, so the task doesn't have to be executed.
We want the task to be executed only if the source file has changed or the output file is missing or has changed since the last run of the task.
Gradle supports this pattern; this support is known as incremental build support.
It will really speed up a build process, because only those tasks that need to be executed are executed.
We need to change the definition of our task, so that Gradle can determine whether the task needs to be executed based on changes in the input file or output file of the task.
A task has the properties inputs and outputs that are used for this purpose.
To define an input file, we invoke the file method of the inputs property with the value of our input file.
We set the output file by invoking the file method of the outputs property.
Let's rewrite our task to make it support Gradle's incremental build feature:
When we run the build file a couple of times, we see that our task is skipped the second time we run it, because the input and output file haven't changed:
We have defined a single file for the inputs and outputs properties.
But Gradle supports more ways to define values for these properties.
The inputs property has methods to add a directory, multiple files, or even properties to be watched for changes.
The outputs property has methods to add a directory or multiple files to be monitored for changes.
And if these methods are not appropriate for our build, we can even use the method upToDateWhen for the outputs property.
We pass a closure or implementation of the org.gradle.api.specs.Spec interface to define a predicate that determines whether the output of the task is up-to-date.
If project.version changes then the // task is no longer up-to-date inputs.property 'version', project.version.
If output directory contains any file which name // starts with output and has the txt extension, // then the task is up-to-date.
Summary In this chapter we learned how to create tasks in a build project.
We created tasks with actions in several ways and learned how to configure tasks.
We skipped tasks by using predicates, throwing StopExecutionException, and enabling or disabling a task.
And we even learned how to skip tasks from the command line.
A very powerful feature of Gradle is the incremental build support.
We can define the rules for determining the up-to-date state in the tasks definition.
In the next chapter, we will take a more in-depth look at the Gradle Project object.
We use a Groovy DSL to express our build logic.
Gradle has several useful built-in methods for handling files and directories, because we often deal with files and directories in our build logic.
In this chapter we will learn how we can use Gradle's features to work with files and directories.
Also, we will take a look at how we can set properties in a Gradle build and use Gradle's logging framework.
Finally, we see will how we can use the Gradle wrapper task to distribute a configurable Gradle with our build scripts.
Working with files It is very common in a build script that we have to work with files and directories.
For example, when we need to copy a file from one directory to another, or when we first create a directory to store the output of a task or program.
This method is actually a method of the Project object that is connected to our build script.
In the previous chapter we learned how we could use an explicit reference to the project variable or simply invoke methods and properties of the Project object implicitly.
This is very useful because we can run a build script from a different directory than the location of the actual build resolved relative to the project directory.
We can also use closure to define the file or directory.
Finally, we could also pass an instance of the java.util.concurrent.Callable interface, where the return value.
Use a closure to determine the // file or directory name.
In case we want to check if build script is written in Groovy, we can also use the extra properties and methods added by Groovy to the File class.
For example, we can use the text property to read the contents of a file.
However, we can only test the File object after we have doesn't exist or if we are dealing with a file and we expected to be dealing with a org.gradle.api.PathValidation.
Gradle then validates if the created File object is valid for the PathValidation instance; if it isn't, the build is stopped and we get a nice error message telling us what went wrong.
Suppose we want to work with a directory named config, in our build script.
The directory must be present, otherwise the build will stop:
Now we can run the build and see from the output that the directory doesn't exist:
We can also use the PathValidation argument to test if a File object is really a file and not a directory.
Finally, we can check if the File object references an existing file or directory.
If the file or directory doesn't exist, an exception is thrown and the build stops:
Using file collections We can also work with a set of files or directories instead of just a single file or directory.
In Gradle, a set of files is represented by the ConfigurableFileCollection interface.
The nice thing is that a lot of classes in the Gradle API implement this interface.
This method is defined in the Project object we can access in our build script.
For example, we can use String and File objects to define a file collection.
But these are not the only arguments we can use.
We can also use an array, Collection, or Iterable object with filenames or another ConfigurableFileCollection instance as an argument:
We can also use a closure or an instance of the Callable interface to define a list of files:
Let's look at the convert task we created in the previous chapter.
This task has an outputs property with a single file, but this could also be multiple files or a directory.
To get the file collection object in our build script, we simply pass the Task instance as an argument.
Get the file collection from // the task outputs property.
It is also important to note that the file collection is lazy.
This means the paths in the collection are not resolved when we define the collection.
The paths in the collection are only resolved when the files are actually queried and used in the build script.
The ConfigurableFileCollection interface has useful methods to manipulate the collection, for example, we can use the + and - operators to add or remove elements from the collection, respectively:
To get the absolute path names for the elements in ConfigurableFileCollection, we can use the asPath property.
The path names are separated by the operating system's path separator.
On a Microsoft Windows operating system, the semicolon (;) is used as a path separator, and in Linux or Mac OS X operating systems, the colon (:) is used.
This means we can simply use the asPath property on any operating system and Gradle will automatically use the correct path separator:
When we run the build script on Mac OS X, we get the following output:
To get the File objects that make up the file collection, we can use the files property.
We can also cast the collection to a list of File objects using the as keyword; if we know our collection is made up of just a single file or directory, then we can use the singleFile property to get the File object:
This means that if we add new elements to the original collection, the filter closure is applied again for our filtered collection.
In the following example we have the filterFiles task, where we define a file collection of two files with the names INSTALL.txt and README.
Next, we define a new file collection with a filter that contains all files that have the filename extension .txt.
This collection is a live, filtered collection because when we add a new file to the original collection, the filtered collection is also updated:
Working with file trees In Gradle we can also work with file collections organized as a tree, for example, a directory tree on a disk or hierarchical content in a ZIP file.
A hierarchical file collection is represented by a ConfigurableFileTree interface.
This interface extends the ConfigurableFileCollection interface that we saw earlier.
If we don't provide a base directory, the current project directory is used as the base directory of the file tree.
We can use the include and includes properties and methods to define a matching pattern to include a file (or files) in the file tree.
With the exclude and excludes properties and methods, we can use the same syntax to exclude a file or multiple files from the file tree.
The matching pattern style is described as an ANT-style matching pattern because the ANT build tool uses this style to define a syntax for matching filenames in file trees.
The following example demonstrates how we can create a file tree:
Create file tree with base directory 'src/main' // and only include files with extension .java.
Create file tree with project directory as base // object to include 2 files.
We can use the include, includes, exclude, and excludes methods to either include or exclude files from the file tree:
Copying files To copy files in Gradle, we can use the Copy task.
We must assign a set of source files to be copied and the destination of those files.
The following example shows a simple Copy task called simpleCopy with a single source directory src/xml and a destination directory definitions:
If the argument is a file, then only that file is copied.
We can apply the ANT-style matching patterns just like we do with the.
The following example defines a task with the name copyTask and uses the.
Our simpleCopy task could also have been written like this:
The method accepts a closure argument, with the closure argument being the name of the file.
We can return a new filename to change the filename or return a null value to keep the original filename:
Besides using a closure to rename files during the copy action, we can use a String value as a regular expression or a java.util.regexp.Pattern object as a regular expression.
We also provide the replacement String value when a filename matches the pattern.
If the regular expression captures groups, we must use the $1 syntax to reference a group.
If a file doesn't match the regular expression, the original filename is used:
Rename files that start with sample// and remove the sample- part.
Filtering files and we must return a new String value to replace that line.
Besides a closure, we can pass an implementation of the java.io.FilterReader interface.
The ANT build tool already has several filter implementations that we can use in a Gradle build.
We must import the org.apache.tools.ant.filters.* package to access the ANT filters.
We can pass along the properties for a filter with this method invocation:
If we execute the filterFiles task, we get the resulting filter.txt file in the dist directory:
We execute the expandFiles task with the following contents for src/expand.txt:
Then, we get the following new contents in the file dist/expanded.txt:
Archiving files To create an archive file, we can use the Zip, Tar, Jar, War, and Ear tasks.
To define the source files for the archive and the destination inside the archive files, we use a to learn anything new; we can use what we have already learned.
To set the filename of the archive, we use any of these properties: baseName, appendix, version, classifier, and extension.
Gradle will use the following pattern to create a filename: [baseName]-[appendix]-[version]-[classifier]
If a property is not set, then it is not included in the resulting filename.
To override the default filename pattern, we can set the archiveName property and assign our own complete filename, which is used for the resulting archive file.
In the following example, we create a ZIP archive with the archiveZip task.
We include all the files from the dist directory and put them in the root of the archive.
The name of the file is set by the individual properties that follow Gradle's pattern:
When we run the archiveDist task, a new file called dist-files-archive-1.0sample.zip is created in the root of our project.
To change the destination directory of the archive file, we must set the destinationDir property.
In the following example, we set the destination directory to build/zips.
We also put the files in file is now set by the archiveName property:
To create a TAR archive with the optional gzip or bzip2 compression, we must use the tarFiles task.
The syntax is the same as the task for type Zip, but we have an extra property compression that we can use to set the type of compression (gzip, bzip2) we want to use.
If we don't specify the compression property, no compression is used to create the archive file.
In the following example, we create a tarFiles task of type Tar.
After running this task, we get a new file called dist/tarballs/dist-files.tar.gz:
The Jar, War, and Ear task types follow the same pattern as the Zip and Tar task types.
Each type has some extra properties and methods to include files specific for that type of archive.
We will see examples of these tasks when we look at how we can use Gradle in Java projects.
Project properties In a Gradle build file we can access several properties that are defined by Gradle, but we can also create our own properties.
We can set the value of our custom properties directly in the build script and also by passing values via the command line.
The default properties we can access in a Gradle build are displayed in the following table:
The following build file has a task to show the value of the properties:
When we run the build, we get the following output:
Defining custom properties in script To add our own properties, we have to define them in an ext{} script block in a build file.
To read the value of the property, we don't have to use the ext.
The property is automatically added to the internal project property as well.
In the following script, we add a property customProperty with a String value custom.
In the showProperties task, we show the value of the property:
Passing properties via the command line Instead of defining the property directly in the build script, we can use the -P command-line option to add an extra property to a build.
We can also use the -P command-line option to set a value for an existing property.
The following build script has a showProperties task that shows the value of an existing property and a new property:
Let's run our script and pass the values for the existing version property and the non-existent customProperty:
Defining properties via system properties We can also use Java system properties to define properties for our Gradle build.
We use the -D command-line option just like in a normal Java application.
The name of the system property must start with org.gradle.project, then the name of the property we want to set, followed by the value.
We can use the same build script we created before:
But this time we use different command-line options to get a result:
Adding properties via environment variables Using the command-line options provides much flexibility; however, sometimes we cannot use the command-line options because of environment restrictions or because we don't want to retype the complete command-line options each time we invoke the Gradle build.
Gradle can also use environment variables set in the operating system to pass properties to a Gradle build.
The environment variable name starts with ORG_GRADLE_PROJECT_ and is followed by the property name.
Defining properties using an external file Finally, we can also set the properties for our project in an external file.
The file needs to be named gradle.properties and it should be a plain text file with the name of the property and its value on separate lines.
We can place the file in the project directory or in the Gradle user home directory.
A property defined in the properties file in the Gradle user home directory overrides the property values defined in a properties file in the project directory.
We will now create a gradle.properties file in our project directory, with the following contents:
We use our build file to show the property values:
If we run the build file, we don't have to pass any command-line options; Gradle will use gradle.properties to get values of the properties:
Using logging In Chapter 1, Starting with Gradle, we learned about several command-line options we can use to show either more or fewer log messages when we run a Gradle build.
These messages were from the Gradle internal tasks and classes.
We used a println method in our Gradle build scripts to see some output, but we can also use Gradle's logging mechanisms to have a more customizable way to define logging messages.
Gradle supports several logging levels that we can use for our own messages.
The level of our messages is important because we can use the command-line options to filter the messages for log levels.
The following table shows the log levels that are supported by Gradle:
Every Gradle build file and task has a logger object.
The logger object is an instance of a Gradle-specific extension of the SLF4J Logger interface.
This library provides a logging API that is independent of the underlying logging framework.
A specific logging framework can be used at deploy time or runtime to output the actual log message.
To use the logger object in our Gradle build files, we only have to reference logger and invoke the method for the logging level we want to use, or we can use the.
Let's create a simple task and use the different log levels:
When we run this task from the command line, we get the following output:
We notice that only the LIFECYCLE, WARN, QUIET, and ERROR log levels are shown if we don't add any extra command-line options.
To see the INFO messages, we must use the --info command-line option.
Task ':logLevels' has not declared any outputs, assuming that it is out-of-date.
Notice that we also get more messages from Gradle itself.
Earlier, we only saw the log messages from our script, but this time a lot of extra logging is shown about the build process itself.
To get even more output and our DEBUG level logging messages, we must use the --debug command-line option to invoke the logLevels task:
This time, we get a lot of messages and we really have to look closely for our own.
The output format of the logging has also changed; notice that while only the log message was shown before, now the time, log level, and originating class for the log message are also displayed.
So, we know every Gradle project and task has a logger we can use.
But we can also explicitly create a logger instance with the Logging class.
If, for example, we define our own class and want to use it in a Gradle build, we can use the just like in projects and tasks.
We will now add a class definition in our build file and use an instance of this class to see the output:
We have used the logger of the project and task; in the class Simple, we use script, we get the following output:
To see the originating class of the logger, we can use the --debug (or -d) command-line option.
Then we will see not only the time the message was logged, but also the name of the logger:
Notice that our project logger is named org.gradle.api.Project, the task logger is named org.gradle.api.Task, and our logger in the Simple class is named Simple.
Gradle redirects the output sent to System.out—which is what we do the output and uses its logging support.
When we run the following very simple Gradle build with the --debug option, we can see that Gradle has redirected the output to the QUIET log level:
Gradle redirects standard error to log messages, with log level ERROR.
This also applies to classes we use from external libraries in our Gradle build.
If the code in those libraries uses standard output and error, Gradle will capture the output and error messages and redirect them to the logger instance.
We can configure this ourselves if we want to change which log level is used for the redirected output and error messages.
Every project and task has an instance of the org.gradle.api.logging.LoggingManager class with the output and error messages.
Remember that Gradle will, by default, use the QUIET log level for output messages and the ERROR log level for error messages.
In the following script, we change the log level for output messages to INFO:
First we run the build without any extra command-line options:
Notice that the println statement we have defined in the doFirst method of our task is shown, but the output of the other println statements is not shown.
We redirected the output of those println statements to Gradle's logging with log level INFO.
Let's run the script again, but now we add the --info command-line option so we can see all the output of our println statements:
This message is now logged with log level info instead of quiet.
Task ':redirectLogging' has not declared any outputs, assuming that it is out-of-date.
Using the Gradle wrapper Normally, if we want to run a Gradle build, we must have Gradle installed on our computer.
Also, if we distribute our project to others and they want to build the project, they must have Gradle installed on their computers.
The Gradle wrapper can be used to allow others to build our project even if they don't have Gradle installed on their computers.
The wrapper is a batch script on the Microsoft Windows operating systems or shell script on other operating systems that will download Gradle and run the build using the downloaded Gradle.
By using the wrapper, we can make sure the correct Gradle version for the project is used.
We can define the Gradle version, and if we run the build via the wrapper script file, the version of Gradle that we defined is used.
Creating wrapper scripts To create the Gradle wrapper batch and shell script, we must add a task to our build.
We set the gradleVersion property to the Gradle version we want to use.
The following sample build file shows how we configure a Wrapper task:
Next, we can execute the createGradleWrapper task to generate the files from the command line:
After the execution of the task, we have two script files: gradlew.bat and gradlew in the root of our project directory.
These scripts contain all the logic needed to run Gradle.
If Gradle is not downloaded yet, the Gradle distribution will be downloaded and installed locally.
In the directory gradle/wrapper relative to our project directory we find the files gradle-wrapper.jar and gradle-wrapper.properties.
The gradle-wrapper.properties file contains settings, such as specifying the URL to download Gradle.
If a new Gradle version is released, we only have to change the version in the gradle-wrapper.properties file and the Gradle wrapper will download the new version, so we can use it to build our project.
All the generated files are now part of our project.
If we use a version control system, then we must add these files to the version control.
Other people that check out our project can use the gradlew scripts to execute tasks from the project.
The specified Gradle version is downloaded and used to run the build file.
We can even delete the createGradleWrapper task from our build file.
If we want to use another Gradle version, we can set the gradleVersion property in the gradle/ wrapper/gradle-wrapper.properties file.
Customizing the Gradle wrapper We can change the names of the script files that are generated with the scriptFile property of the Wrapper task.
To change the name of the generated JAR and properties files, we can change the jarFile property:
To change the URL from which the Gradle version must be downloaded, we can alter the distributionUrl property.
For example, we could publish a fixed Gradle version on our company intranet and use the distributionUrl property to reference a download URL on our intranet.
This way we can make sure all developers in the company use the same Gradle version:
Summary In this chapter we learned about the support that Gradle gives when working with files.
We saw how to create a file or directory and a collection of files and directories.
We can add logging messages to our project and tasks and see the output when we run a Gradle build.
We learned how to use different log levels to influence how much information is shown in the output.
We also used LoggingManager to capture standard output and error messages and redirect them to custom log levels.
We learned how we can use the Gradle wrapper to allow users to build our projects even if they don't have Gradle installed.
We learned how we can customize the wrapper to download a specific version of Gradle and use it to run our build.
In the next chapter, we will create a Java project and use the Java plugin to add a set of default tasks we can use to compile, test, and package our Java code.
We have seen how we can write tasks in a Gradle build and how we can execute them, but we haven't seen how we can do real-life tasks such as compiling source code or testing with Gradle.
In this chapter, we will learn how we can use the Gradle Java plugin to get tasks for compiling and packaging a Java project.
We will also see how Gradle's build-by-convention features make it very easy to start and work with source code.
Using plugins In Gradle, we can apply plugins to our project.
A plugin basically adds extra functionalities such as tasks and properties to our project.
By using a plugin, functionality is decoupled from the core Gradle build logic.
We can write our own plugins, but Gradle also ships with plugins that are ready out of the box.
This plugin adds tasks for compiling, testing, and packaging Java source code to our project.
The plugins that are packaged with a Gradle version are never updated or changed for that version, so if new functionality is added to a plugin, a whole new Gradle version will be released.
We can release new versions of our own plugins, independent of the Gradle version.
Getting started The Java plugin provides a lot of useful tasks and properties we can use for building a Java application or library.
If we follow the convention-over-configuration support of the plugin, we don't have to write a lot of code in our Gradle build file to use it.
If we want to, we can still add extra configuration options to override the default conventions defined by the plugin.
Let's start with a new build file and use the Java plugin.
We only have to apply the plugin for our build:
And that's it! By just adding this simple line, we now have a lot of tasks we can use to work with in our Java project.
To see which tasks have been added by the plugin, we run the tasks command on the command line and look at the output:
Pattern: upload<ConfigurationName>: Assembles and uploads the artifacts belonging to a configuration.
To see all tasks and more detail, run with --all.
If we look at the list of tasks, we can see how many tasks are now available to us that we didn't have before; all this just by adding a simple line to our build file.
We have several task groups with their own individual tasks that can be used.
We have tasks related to building source code and packaging in the Build tasks section.
The task javadoc is used to generate Javadoc documentation, and is in the Documentation tasks section.
The tasks for running tests and checking code quality are in the Verification tasks section.
Finally, we have several rule-based tasks to build, upload, and clean artifacts or tasks in our Java project.
The tasks added by the Java plugin are the visible part of the newly added functionality to our project.
But the plugin also adds a so-called convention object to our project.
A convention object has several properties and methods, which are used by the tasks of the plugin.
These properties and methods are added to our project, and can be accessed like normal project properties and methods.
So with the convention object, we can not only look at the properties used by the tasks in the plugin, but we can also change the value of the properties to reconfigure certain tasks.
Using the Java plugin To work with the Java plugin, we are first going to create a very simple Java source file.
We can then use the plugin's tasks to build the source file.
You can make this application as complex as you wish, but in order to stay on topic, we will make this as simple as possible.
By applying the Java plugin, we must now follow some conventions for our project directory structure.
To build the source code, our Java source files must be in the src/main/java directory, relative to the project directory.
If we have non-Java source files that need to be included in the JAR file, we must place them in the directory src/main/resources.
Our test source files need to be in the src/test/ java directory, and any non-Java source files needed for testing can be placed in src/test/resources.
These conventions can be changed if we want or need it, but it is a good idea to stick to them so we don't have to write any extra code in our build file, which could cause errors.
Our sample Java project we will write is a Java class that uses an external property file to get a welcome message.
The source file with the name Sample.java is located in the src/main/java directory:
The welcome message itself is defined in a properties file with the name messages.
To compile the Java source file and process the properties file, we run the classes task.
Note that the classes task has been added by the Java plugin.
The classes task is actually dependent on two other tasks—compileJava and processResources.
We can see this task dependency when we run the tasks command with the command-line option --all:
Here we can see that the tasks compileJava and processResources are executed, because the classes task depends on these tasks.
The compiled class file and properties file are now in the directories build/classes/main and build/ resources/main.
The build directory is the default directory that Gradle uses to build output files.
If we execute the classes task again, we notice that the tasks support the incremental build feature of Gradle.
As we haven't changed the Java source file or the properties file, and the output is still present, all the tasks can be skipped because they are up-to-date:
To package our class file and properties file, we invoke the jar task.
This task is also added by the Java plugin and depends on the classes task.
This means that if we run the jar task, the classes task is also executed.
The default name of the resulting JAR file is the name of our project.
So if our project is called sample, then the JAR file is called sample.jar.
If we look at the contents of the JAR file, we see our compiled class file and the messages.properties file.
Also, a manifest file is added automatically by the jar task:
We can also execute the assemble task to create the JAR file.
The assemble task, another lifecycle task, is dependent on the jar task and can be extended by other plugins.
We could also add dependencies on other tasks that create packages for a project other than just the JAR file, such as a WAR file or ZIP archive file:
To start fresh and clean all the generated output from the previous tasks, we can use the clean task.
This task deletes the project build directory and all the generated files in that directory.
So if we execute the clean task from the command line, Gradle will delete the build directory:
Note that the Java plugin also added some rule-based tasks.
We can use this task to remove the output files of a specific task.
The clean task deletes the complete build directory, but with clean<TaskName>, we delete only the files and directories created by the named task.
For example, to clean the generated Java class files of the compileJava task, we execute the cleanCompileJava task.
Because this is a rule-based task, Gradle will determine that everything after clean must be a valid task in our project.
The files and directories created by that task are then determined by Gradle and deleted:
Working with source sets The Java plugin also adds a new concept to our project—source sets.
A source set is a collection of source files that are compiled and executed together.
The files can be Java source files or resource files.
Source sets can be used to group together files with a certain meaning in our project, without having to create a separate project.
For example, we can separate the location of source files that describe the API of our Java project in a source set, and run tasks that only apply to the files in this source set.
Without any configuration, we already have the main and test source sets, which are added by the Java plugin.
For example, compileJava applies to the main source test, but compileTestJava applies to the test source set.
Each source set also has some properties to access the directories and files that make up the source set.
The following table shows the properties we can access in a source set:
Only files with the extension .java are in this collection.
Other plugins can add extra source files to this collection.
This contains all the files in the resources source directory, excluding any files with the extension .java.
It includes all the source files of this source set, both resource and Java source files.
Set<File> Directories with the resource files for this source set.
File The output directory with the compiled class files for the Java source files in this source set.
File The output directory with the processed resource files from the resources in this source set.
We can access these properties via the sourceSets property of our project.
In the following example, we will create a new task to display values for several properties:
When we run the task sourceSetJavaProperties, we get the following output:
Creating a new source set We can create our own source set in a project.
A source set contains all the source files that are related to each other.
In our example, we will add a new source set to include a Java interface.
Our Sample class will then implement the interface, but because we use a separate source set, we can later use this to create a separate JAR file with only the compiled interface class.
We will name the source set api, because the interface is actually the API of our example project that we can share with other projects.
To define this source set, we only have to put the name in the sourceSets property of the project:
Gradle will create three new tasks based on this source set—apiClasses, compileApiJava, and processApiResources.
We can see these tasks after we execute the tasks command:
We have created our Java interface in the directory src/api/java, which is the source directory for the Java source files for the api source set.
The following code allows us to see the Java interface:
To compile the source file, we can execute the task compileApiJava or apiClasses:
We will now change the source code of our Sample class and implement the ReadWelcomeMessage interface:
Next, we run the classes task to recompile our changed Java source file:
Run with --info or --debug option to get more log output.
We get a compilation error! The Java compiler cannot find the ReadWelcomeMessage interface.
But we just ran the apiClasses task and compiled the interface without errors.
To fix this, we must define a dependency between the classes and apiClasses tasks.
First, the interface must be compiled, and then the class that implements the interface.
Next, we must add the output directory with the compiled interface class file, to the compileClasspath property of the main source set.
Once we have done that, we know for sure that the Java compiler for compiling the Sample class picks up the compiled class file.
To do this, we will change the build file and add the task dependency between the two tasks and the main source set configuration:
Now we can run the classes task again, without errors:
Custom configuration If we use Gradle for an existing project, we might have a different directory structure than the default structure defined by Gradle, or it may be that we want to have a different structure for another reason.
We can account for this by configuring the source sets and using different values for the source directories.
Suppose that we have a project with the following source directory structure:
We will need to reconfigure the main and test source sets, but we must also add a new integration-test source set.
The following code reflects the directory structure for the source sets:
Notice how we must put the name of the integration-test source set in quotes; this is because we use a hyphen in the name.
Gradle then converts the name of the source set into integrationTest (without the hyphen and with a capital T)
To compile, for example, the source files of the integration test source set, we use the compileIntegrationTestJava task.
Working with properties We have now already learned that the Java plugin adds tasks and source sets to our Gradle project; however, we also get a lot of new properties that we can use.
Custom properties of a plugin are set in a Convention object of type org.gradle.
A Convention object is used by a plugin to expose properties and methods that we can use in our project.
The Convention object of the plugin is added to the convention property of a project.
The convention property of a Gradle project is a container for all the Convention objects from the plugins.
We can access the properties from the plugin's Convention object directly as project properties, or we can specify a complete path to the Convention object of the plugin, to get to a property or invoke a method.
For example, the sourceSets property is a property of the Convention object of the Java plugin.
With the following task, showConvention, we see the different ways we have to access that property:
To see all the properties available for us, we must invoke the properties task from the command line.
The following output shows part of the output from the properties task:
If we look through the list, we see a lot of properties that we can use to redefine the directories where output files of the compile or test tasks are stored.
Property name Default value Description distDirName distributions The directory name relative.
Name of directory for storing cached information about dependencies, relative to the build directory.
The Java plugin also adds other properties to our project.
These properties can be used to set the source and target compatibility of the Java version for compiling the Java source files, or to set the base filename for the generated JAR files.
The following table shows the convention properties of the Java plugin:
The base file name to use for archives created by archive tasks such as jar.
The Java version compatibility to use when compiling Java source files with the compile task.
In our example project, we already saw that the generated JAR file was named after the project name, but with the archivesBaseName property, we can change that.
We can also change the source compatibility to Java 6 for our project.
Finally, we can also change the manifest that is used for the generated JAR file.
Need to explicitly set manifest on jar task, // but should be automatic.
If we now invoke the assemble task to create our JAR file and look into the build/ libs directory, we can see that the JAR file is now named gradle-sample-1.0.jar:
If we run the same task with the command-line option --info to set the info log level, we see in the output that the Java 6 compiler is used:
To see the contents of the generated manifest file, we first extract the file from the JAR file and then look at the contents:
Creating documentation To generate Javadoc documentation, we must use the javadoc task that is of type org.gradle.api.tasks.javadoc.Javadoc.
The task generates documentation for the Java source files in the main source set.
If we want to generate documentation for the source sets in our project, we must configure the javadoc task or add an extra javadoc task to our project.
Note that, in our project, we have an api and main source set with the Java source files.
If we want to generate documentation for both the source sets, we have to configure the javadoc task in our project.
The source property of the javadoc task is, by default, set to sourceSets.main.allJava.
If we add sourceSets.api.allJava to the source property, our interface file is also processed by the javadoc task:
Next, we can run the javadoc task, and the documentation is generated and put into the build/docs/javadoc directory:
For example, we can set a title for the generated documentation with the title property.
The default value is the name of the project followed by the project version number, if available.
To change the destination directory, we can set the destinationDir property of the javadoc task to the directory we want.
We can also use the options property to define a lot of properties we know from the Java SDK javadoc tool.
The following example shows how we can set some of the options for the javadoc task in our project:
Assembling archives If we want to package the output of the new api source set in our JAR file, we must define a new task ourselves.
Gradle doesn't provide some magic to do this for us automatically; luckily, the task itself is very simple:
We define the appendix property that is used to the output directory of our api source set, so all generated output is included in the JAR file.
When we run the task apiJar, a new JAR file gradle-sample-api1.0.jar is generated in the build/libs directory:
The base name of the JAR file is the project name, which is similar to one for the jar task.
If we look at the contents, we see our compiled ReadWelcomeMessage class file:
Note also that we didn't define a task dependency between the tasks apiJar and apiClasses, but when we ran the apiJar task, Gradle automatically ran the apiClasses task.
This happened because we used the sourceSets.api.output property to define which files needed to be included in the JAR file; Gradle noticed this and determined which task is responsible for creating the content in the sourceSets.api.output directory.
The apiClasses task is the task that compiles the Java source files, and processes the resources into the build directory, so Gradle will first invoke the apiClasses task before the apiJar task.
Summary In this chapter, we have learned about the support for a Java project in Gradle.
With just a simple line needed to apply the Java plugin, we get masses of functionality, which we can use for our Java code.
We can compile our source files, package the compiled code into a JAR file, and generate documentation.
In the next chapter, we will see how we can add dependencies to external libraries.
We will learn how to configure repositories, and how we can organize our dependencies with configurations.
Dependency Management When we develop our code, we usually use third-party or open source libraries.
These libraries need to be available in the classpath of the compiler, otherwise we will get errors and our build will fail.
Gradle provides support for dependency management, so we can define our dependencies in our build file.
Gradle will then take care of the necessary configuration for our various tasks.
In this chapter, we will learn how we can use dependency management in our builds.
We will also learn about repositories that host dependency artifacts, their dependencies, and how we can handle different repository layouts.
Then we will define dependencies using Gradle syntax, for modules with version information.
Dependency configuration Java has no real support for working with versioned libraries as dependencies.
Maven is a complete build tool and has a mechanism for dependency management.
Both tools support repositories where versioned libraries are stored, together with metadata about those libraries.
A library can have dependencies on other libraries and is described in the metadata of the library.
Ivy fully supports Maven descriptor files and repositories; it also adds some extra functionality.
So with Ivy, you get what you would with Maven, and then some more.
That is why Gradle uses the Ivy API under the hood to do dependency management.
Gradle also adds some extra sugar on top of Ivy, so we can define and use dependencies in a very flexible way.
In a Gradle build file, we group dependencies together in a configuration.
A configuration has a name, and configurations can extend each other.
With a configuration, we can make logical groups of dependencies.
For example, we can create a javaCompile configuration to include dependencies needed to compile the Java code.
We can add as many configurations to our build as we want to.
A configuration, as with a label, can be used when we define a dependency.
We can use a closure to configure the container with Configuration objects.
Each Configuration object has at least a name, but we can change more properties.
We can set a resolution strategy, if a configuration has version conflicts with dependencies, or we can change the visibility of a configuration so that it will not be visible outside of our project.
In the following example, we create a new configuration with the name commonsLib to hold our dependencies and a configuration mainLib that extends commonsLib.
The extended configuration mainLib gets all settings and dependencies from commonsLib, and we can assign extra dependencies as well:
The output of the build shows the names of the configurations:
We used the Java plugin in the previous chapter, which added four configurations to our project.
With the built-in task dependencies, we can get an overview of defined dependencies and configurations for a project.
We get the following output if we execute the dependencies task:
Notice how we already have six configurations in our project.
The following table shows the configuration and which tasks use the configuration:
If our code has a dependency on a library, we can set the dependency with the compile configuration.
The dependency is then automatically available in the runtime, testCompile, testRuntime, and default configurations.
Repositories Dependencies are usually stored in some kind of repository.
A repository has a layout that defines a pattern for the path of a versioned library module.
Gradle knows, for example, the layout of a Maven repository.
Ivy repositories can have customized layouts, and with Gradle, we can configure a customized layout.
The repository can be accessible via the file system, HTTP, SSH, or other protocols.
We can declare several repository types in the Gradle build file.
Gradle provides some preconfigured repositories, but it is also very easy to use a custom Maven or Ivy repository.
We can also declare a simple file system repository to be used for resolving and finding dependencies.
The following table shows the preconfigured and custom repositories we can use:
Repository type Description Maven repository Maven layout repository on a remote.
Maven local repository Preconfigured Maven repository that finds dependencies in the local Maven repository.
Ivy repository Ivy repository that can be located on a local or remote computer.
Flat directory repository Simple repository on the local file system of the computer or a network share.
Adding Maven repositories A lot of Java projects use Maven as a build tool and for Maven's dependency management features.
A Maven repository stores libraries with version information and metadata described in a descriptor XML file.
The organization section is split into subfolders based on the dots used in the organization name.
For example, if the organization name is org.gradle, an org folder with the subfolder gradle needs to be in the Maven repository.
The Maven central repository is located at http://repo1.maven.org/maven2 and contains a lot of libraries.
Many open source projects deploy their artifacts to Maven's is a build file where we have defined the Maven central repository:
If we have used Maven before on our computer, there is a good chance we have a local Maven repository.
Maven will use a hidden folder in our home directory to store downloaded dependency libraries.
We can add this local Maven repository, local repository to our build file, as follows:
Both the central and local Maven repositories are preconfigured Maven repositories.
We can also add a custom repository that follows the Maven layout.
For example, our company can have a Maven repository available via the intranet.
The example build file uses both methods to add two new Maven repositories available through our intranet:
Both methods configure a repository via a combination of a closure and method arguments.
Sometimes we must access a Maven repository that stores the metadata in descriptor XML files, but the actual JAR files are in a different location.
To support this scenario, we must set the property artifactUrls and assign the addresses of the servers that store the JAR files:
To access a Maven repository with basic authentication, we can set the credentials when we define the repository:
It is not a good idea to store the username and password as plain text in the build file; this is because anyone can read our password, if stored in plain text.
It is better if we define the properties in a file gradle.properties, in the Gradle user home directory, apply the correct security constraints on the property file, and use those properties in our build file:
Adding Ivy repositories An Ivy repository has a customizable layout; this means that there is no single predefined layout as with a Maven repository.
The name of the organization is not split into subfolders, as with the Maven layout.
If our Ivy repository has a Maven layout, we can set the layout property to maven.
We can use the same property to define a custom layout for a repository.
We define the patterns that are used to resolve the descriptor XML files and the actual library files.
The following table shows the different layout names we can use and the default patterns for the preconfigured layouts:
The example build file uses the preconfigured layout names gradle and maven and also a custom pattern:
To access an Ivy repository that is secured with basic authentication, we must pass our credentials.
Just like with the secured Maven repository, it is best to store the username and password as properties in the file $USER_HOME/.gradle/ gradle.properties:
Adding a local directory repository To use a simple repository on the local file system or a network share mapped as arguments or a closure to configure the correct directory.
Gradle will resolve files in the configured directory using the first match it finds with the following patterns:
The following example build file defines a flat directory repository:
Defining dependencies We learned how to use dependency configurations to group together dependencies; we saw how we must define repositories so dependencies can be resolved, but we haven't yet learned how to define the actual dependencies.
We define dependencies in our build project with the dependencies{} script block.
We define a closure to pass to the dependencies{} script block, with the configuration of the dependency.
Dependency type Method Description External module dependency - A dependency on an external.
Dependency on a collection of files on the local computer.
We can override meta information using this type of dependency.
We use this dependency when we develop Gradle plugins and tasks.
We use this dependency when we develop Gradle plugins and tasks.
Using external module dependencies The most used dependency is the external module dependency.
For example, we can use arguments to set a group name, module name, and revision of the dependency.
Or, we can use the String notation to set the group name, module name, and revision in a single string.
We always assign a dependency to a specific dependency configuration.
The dependency configuration must be defined by ourselves or by a plugin we have applied to our project.
In the following example build file, we will use the Java plugin, so we get a compile and runtime dependency configuration.
We will also assign several external module dependencies to each configuration using the different syntax rules:
Remember that a Gradle build file is a Groovy script file, so we can define variables to set values and use them in the dependencies{} script block configuration closure.
Gradle will look for the descriptor file in the Maven central repository.
If the file is found, the artifact of the module and the dependencies of the module are downloaded and made available to the dependency configuration.
To see the dependencies and the transitive dependencies, we invoke the built-in task dependencies.
To only download the artifact of an external dependency and not the transitive dependencies, we can set the property transitive to false, for the dependency.
We can set the property with a closure or as an extra property in the argument list:
Or we can use the transitive property // as method argument.
Gradle will look at the descriptor file of the module and exclude any dependencies.
For example, in the following build file we exclude the transitive dependency org.
To only get an artifact of an external module dependency we can use the "artifactonly" notation.
We must also use this notation when a repository doesn't have a module descriptor file and we want to get the artifact.
We must add an @ symbol before the extension of the artifact.
Gradle will not look at the module descriptor file, if available, when we use this notation:
Or we can use the ext property // as method argument.
We can even set the transitive behavior on a complete configuration.
We can set the value to true or false to change the transitive behavior for each dependency we define in the configuration.
In the following sample build file, we set the transitive property on the runtime configuration:
In a Maven repository, we can use classifiers for a dependency.
We can use the classifier in a Gradle dependency definition to select the dependency with the given classifier:
Or we can use the classifier property // as method argument.
The module descriptor of a module in a Maven repository can only have one artifact, but in an Ivy repository, we can define multiple artifacts for a single module.
Each set of artifacts is grouped together in a configuration.
The default configuration contains all artifacts belonging to the module.
If we don't specify the configuration property when we define the dependency for an Ivy module, the default configuration is used.
We must specify the configuration property if we want to use artifacts belonging to that specific configuration:
Using project dependencies Gradle projects can be dependent on each other.
To define such a dependency we use will look for a default dependency configuration in that project and use that as a dependency.
We can use the configuration property to use different dependency configurations as a dependency for each project:
Using file dependencies must be resolved to an actual artifact.
The following example uses file dependencies for the compile configuration:
Using client module dependencies Normally, Gradle will use a descriptor XML file for dependencies found in the repository to see which artifacts and optional transitive dependencies need to be downloaded.
But those descriptor files can be misconfigured, and so we may want to override the descriptors ourselves to ensure the dependencies are correct.
Gradle will then use our own configuration and not the one provided by the module in a repository:
Using Gradle and Groovy dependencies When we develop Grails plugins and tasks, we can define a dependency on the Gradle API and the Groovy libraries used by the current Gradle version.
The following example defines the dependencies in the compile dependency configuration of a project:
Accessing configuration dependencies We can access the dependencies for a dependency configuration in a build file or task through the configurations property of the Project object.
Setting dynamic versions Until now, we have set a version for a dependency explicitly with a complete version number.
To set a minimum version number, we can use a special dynamic version syntax.
In the following example, we will define a dependency on a spring-core version of at least 3.1:
We can also reference the latest released version of a module with latest.
We can also set a version range with a minimum and maximum version number.
Resolving version conflicts If we have a project with a lot of dependencies and those dependencies have transitive dependencies, version conflicts can easily arise.
To change the default behavior, we set the resolutionStrategy property of a dependency configuration.
We can instruct Gradle to fail the build if a conflict arises.
In the following example build file, we instruct Gradle to fail the build if a version conflicts arises for all configurations:
To force a certain version number to be used for all dependencies (even transitive this method we can make sure that, for a given module, the preferred version is always used:
But, if we want to use an optional ANT task we must do something extra, because the optional tasks and their dependencies are not in the Gradle classpath.
Luckily, we only have to define our dependencies for the optional task in the build.gradle file, and we can then define and use the optional ANT task.
In the following sample, we are using the scp ANT optional task.
We define a new configuration with the name sshAntTask and assign the dependencies to this configuration.
Then, we can define the task and set the classpath property to the classpath of the configuration.
We use the asPath property to convert the configuration classpath for the ANT task.
In the sample, we also see how we can ask for user input when the script is run.
The passphrase for the ssh keyfile is a secret and we don't want to keep it in a file somewhere, so we ask the user for it.
Redefine scp ANT task, with the classpath property set to our newly defined // sshAntTask configuration classpath.
Using dependency configurations as files Each dependency configuration implements the FileCollection interface of Gradle.
This means we can use a configuration reference if we need a list of files somewhere.
The files that make up the resolved dependency configuration are then used.
Let's create a new build file and use a dependency configuration as the value for the new configuration, springLibs, to a directory:
Summary In this chapter we have learned about dependency management support in Gradle.
We have seen how to create a dependency configuration or use dependency configurations provided by a plugin.
To get the real dependency artifacts and their transitive dependencies, we must define repositories that store those files.
Finally, we saw how to define the actual dependencies for a dependency configuration.
We learned how to resolve version conflicts between dependencies and how to use those dependencies in a Gradle build.
In the next chapter, we will look at how we can run tests for our code and how we can execute Java applications from our build.
We will also learn how we can publish our own project to a repository.
An important part of developing software is writing tests for our code.
In this chapter, we will learn how we can run our test code as part of the build process.
We can even run tests in parallel to shorten the time of the build, resulting in quick builds.
We will also learn how to run a Java application as part of a Gradle build.
We can use the application plugin to automatically execute a Java application as part of the build.
After we have written and tested our code, it is time to publish the code so others can use it.
We will build a package and deploy our code to a company repository or any other repository.
Testing Gradle has built-in support for running tests for our Java projects.
When we add the Java plugin to our project, we get new tasks to compile and run tests.
We use these dependencies to set the classpath for running the tests in our code base.
Let's write a simple JUnit test for a sample Java class.
The implementation of read a text from a property file and then return the value.
The following example contains the code for the Sample class:
Next, we must add the resource property file that is used by the Sample class.
We create the file messages.properties in the src/main/resources/gradle/ sample directory, with the following contents:
We create a Sample object and invoke the a value we expect to be returned.
The following sample contains the test String value Welcome to Gradle.
We need to create the file SampleTest.java in the directory src/test/java/gradle/sample:
The Gradle build script for these files is very simple.
We first apply the Java plugin, and because we are keeping to Gradle's configuration conventions, we don't have to configure or define much else.
JUnit is one of the most used test frameworks for Java projects.
To make sure the required JUnit classes are available to compile and run the test class, we must add JUnit as a dependency to our project.
The Java plugin adds testCompile and testRuntime configurations we can use.
All JUnit classes are now available to compile the test classes.
The following sample build file contains all the necessary code to execute the test:
To run our test, we only have to invoke the test task that is added by the Java plugin, from the command line:
Run with --info or --debug option to get more log output.
If we look at the output, we see that the test has failed, but we don't see why.
One way to find out is to re-run the test task with extra logging.
We can enable the info logging level with --info (or –i) arguments, as shown in the following command:
In our test, we expected a dot (.) at the end of the String instead of the exclamation mark (!) we got from the property file.
To fix our test, we must change the contents of the property file and replace the exclamation mark with a dot.
Before we do that, we will use a different way to see the test results.
Until now, we looked at the output on the command line after running the test task.
In the directory build/reports/test, there is an HTML file report available with the results of our test run.
If we open the file build/reports/test/index.html in a web browser, we get a clear overview of the tests that have run and failed:
We can click on the method name of a failed test to see the details.
Here we see again the message stating that the expected String value had a dot instead of an exclamation mark at the end of the line:
Let's change the contents of the messages.properties file and use a dot instead of an exclamation mark at the end of the line:
Now we run the test task again, from the command line:
The Gradle build did not fail this time and is successful.
The following screenshot shows that the tests are 100 percent successful and are also documented in the generated test HTML reports:
Using TestNG for testing We have written a test with the JUnit test framework.
Gradle also supports tests that are written with the TestNG test framework.
Gradle scans the test classpath for all class files and checks if they have specific JUnit or TestNG annotations.
If a test class or super class extends TestCase or GroovyTestCase or is annotated with the @RunWith annotation, the test class is also determined to be a JUnit test.
For Gradle to use either JUnit or TestNG tests when we run the test task, we invoke correct testing framework.
Gradle uses JUnit as testing framework by default, so we test frameworks to test our code.
Let's write a new test, but this time we will use TestNG annotations and classes.
The following sample class is the same test as we saw before, but written with the TestNG framework:
We need to add the TestNG dependency to the testCompile dependency task, so Gradle will pick up our new test.
We create a new build file and add the following:
Now we can run the test task again, but this time Gradle will use our TestNG test:
The generated HTML test report is in the directory build/reports/tests.
We can open the file index.html in our web browser and see the output that is generated by the TestNG framework.
The following screenshot shows an example of the output that we can view:
Gradle cannot use the test task to run both the JUnit and TestNG tests at the same time.
If we have both types of tests in our project and we want to run them, we must add a new task of type Test.
This new task can run the specific tests for one of the frameworks.
We add a new task of type Test to run the TestNG tests in our build file:
The following sample build file uses some of these options to configure TestNG:
Configuring the test process The tests that are executed by the test task run in a separate, isolated JVM process.
We can set system properties and JVM arguments, and we can configure the Java class that needs to be executed to run the tests.
To debug the tests, we can set the debug property of the test task.
Gradle will start the test process in debug mode and will listen on port 5005 for a debug process to attach to.
This way, we can run our tests and use an IDE debugger to step through the code.
By default, Gradle will fail the build if any test fails.
If we want to change this setting, we must set the ignoreFailures property to true.
Our build will then not fail, even if we have errors in our tests.
It is bad practice to ignore failures, but it is good to know the option is there if we need it.
The following build file configures the test task with the properties just discussed:
A test process only executes a single test at a time.
By enabling parallel test execution, the total execution time of the test task can drastically decrease, if we have a lot of tests.
We must use the maxParallelForks property to set how many test processes we want to run in parallel.
The default value is 1, which means that the tests don't run in parallel.
Each test process sets a system property of the name org.gradle.test.worker with a unique value.
We could use this value to generate unique files for a test process.
If we have a lot of tests that are executed by a single test process, we might get heap size or PermGen problems.
With the property forkEvery, we can set how many tests need to run in a single test process, before a new test process is started to execute more tests.
So, if Gradle sees that the number of tests exceeds the given number assigned to the forkEvery property, the test process is restarted and the following set of tests is executed.
Let's create a new build file and configure it such that we can run four test processes in parallel and relaunch the test process after 10 tests:
Determining tests To determine which files are tests, Gradle will inspect the compiled class files.
If a class or its methods have the @Test annotation, Gradle will treat it as a JUnit or TestNG test.
If the class extends TestCase or GroovyTestCase or is annotated with.
We can disable this automatic inspection with the scanForTestClasses property of the test task.
We can also set our own include and exclude rules to find tests.
In the following build file, we disable the automatic class inspection for test classes and set the include and exclude rules for test classes, explicitly:
Logging test output We already noticed that the output that is shown on the command line isn't much if we simply run the test task.
We must set the logging level to info or debug, to get more information about the output that is generated by the tests.
We can configure the test task to show more output with the testLogging property.
If we don't specify a log level, the lifecyle log level is implied.
The property is marked as experimental, which means the features can change in future versions of Gradle.
TestLoggingContainer has the option showStandardStreams, which we can set to true or false.
If we set the value of the property to true, we get the output from System.out and System.err when we run the test tasks.
For example, we can configure that we also want to see the passed tests with the String value passed as an argument.
We can use the arguments standardOut and standardError to get the same effect as with the showStandardStreams property.
If a test fails, we only see the line number of the test that failed.
To get more output for a failed test, we can set the option exceptionFormat to full.
Then, we get the exception message with, say, the assertion failed message.
The default value is short, which only shows the line number.
With the property stackTraceFilters, we can determine how much of the stack trace is logged.
We can also set the maximum and minimum granularity of the log messages with the minGranularity and maxGranularity properties.
The following sample build file sets some of the options that are available:
Set exception format to full // instead of default value 'short'
We can also a script block to configure // the testLogging property.
No log level specified so the // property is set on LIFECYCLE log level.
We can pass arguments to determine // which test events we want to see in the // command-line output.
Generating test reports We have already seen the HTML reports that are generated when we run the tests, in the build/reports/tests directory.
To change the directory name, we can set the testReportDir property as part of the test task.
Besides the generated HTML report, we have XML files that are generated by the test task, with the results of the tests.
These XML files are actually the input for the generated HTML report.
There are a lot of tools available that can use the XML files generated by JUnit or TestNG and perform an analysis on them.
To change this directory, we must change the testResultDir property of the test task.
To disable the generation of the test reports, we set the property testReport to false.
The following build file shows how we can change the report directories and disable the generation of the test reports:
Running Java applications If we want to execute a Java executable from a Gradle build, we have several options.
We will execute this Java class from our build file.
In the directory src/main/java/gradle/sample, we need to create a new file SampleApp.java.
The following code listing shows the contents of the file.
We could also use the JavaExec task in our build file.
Finally, we could use the application plugin to run our SampleApp class.
The method accepts a closure that is used to configure the org.gradle.process.JavaExecSpec object.
JavaExecSpec has several methods and properties we can use to configure the main class that needs to be executed, optional arguments, and system properties.
A lot of the options are the same as for running tests.
To run our Java class, we execute the runJava task from the command line and get the following output:
To configure the task, we can use the same methods and.
In the following sample build file, we create the task runJava of type JavaExec.
We configure the task to set the classpath and main class.
Also, we see how we can add other properties and invoke other methods to further configure the execution of the Java class:
If we run the task we get the following output:
Running an application with the application plugin Another way to run a Java application is with the application plugin.
The application plugin adds functionality to our build file to run Java applications and also to bundle the Java application for distribution.
To use the application plugin, we must add the plugin to our build file with the executed with the property mainClassName.
This time, we don't have to create a new task ourselves.
The plugin has added the run task that we can invoke to run the Java application.
The sample build file uses the application plugin to run our SampleApp class:
We can invoke the run task and see the output of the SampleApp class:
Note that we don't have to set the classpath property anymore.
The plugin automatically includes the runtimeClasspath object of the project to execute the Java class.
Creating a distributable application archive With the application plugin we can also build a distribution with our Java application.
This means we can distribute the application and people can run the Java application without Gradle.
The plugin will create the necessary operating system-specific start scripts and package all necessary classes and dependencies.
The following table shows the extra tasks we can use with the application plugin to build a distribution:
Scripts Creates operating system-specific scripts to run the Java application.
Zip Creates a full distribution ZIP archive including all necessary files to run the Java application.
In order to get a meaningful JAR filename, we set the properties archivesBaseName and version in our build file:
To create the start scripts, we invoke the createScript task.
After we have executed the task, we have two files, sample and sample.bat, in the directory build/ scripts.
The sample.bat file is for the Windows operating system and sample is for other operating systems, such as Linux or OS X.
To have all files that are needed for running the application in a separate directory, we must run the installApp task.
When we execute the task, we get a sample directory in the build/install directory.
The sample directory has a bin directory with the start scripts and a lib directory with the JAR file containing the SampleApp application.
We can change to the build/install/sample directory and then invoke bin/sample or bin/sample.bat to run our application:
To create a ZIP archive with all necessary files, which would enable others to run the application, we run the distZip task.
The resulting ZIP archive can be found in the directory build/distributions.
We can distribute this ZIP file and people can unzip the archive on their computers to run the Java application:
If we want to add other files to the distribution, we can create the directory src/ dist and place files in there.
Any files in the src/dist directory are included in the distribution ZIP archive.
To include files from another directory, we can use the applicationDistribution copy specification.
The following sample build file uses the applicationDistribution copy specification to include the output of the docs task.
Gradle will automatically execute the docs task before invoking the distZip task:
Publishing artifacts A software project can contain artifacts that we want to publish.
An artifact can be a ZIP or JAR archive file or any other file.
In Gradle, we can define more than one artifact for a project.
We can publish these artifacts to a central repository so other developers can use our artifacts in their projects.
These central repositories can be available on a company intranet, a network drive, or via the Internet.
In Gradle, we group artifacts through configurations, just like dependencies.
If we add the Java plugin to our project, we also get two extra tasks per configuration to build and upload the artifacts belonging to the configuration.
The Java plugin also adds the configuration archives that can be used to assign artifacts.
The default JAR artifact for a Java project is already assigned to this configuration.
We can assign more artifacts to this configuration for our project.
We can also add new configurations to assign artifacts in a project.
For our Java project we will define the following sample build file:
Because we use the Java plugin we have the archives configuration available.
When we execute the task buildArchives, our Java code gets compiled and a JAR file is created in the directory build/libs, with the name gradle-sample-1.0.jar.
To publish our JAR file, we can execute the task uploadArchives, but we must first configure where to publish the artifact.
The repositories we have defined for dependencies are not used to upload the artifacts.
We have to define the upload repository in the uploadArchives task.
We can reference a repository already defined in our project or define the repositories in the task.
The following sample build file defines an upload repository at project level and at the task level:
Use repository defined in project // for uploading the JAR file.
If we invoke the task uploadArchives, the JAR file is created and copied to the libs and upload directories.
An ivy.xml configuration file is also created and copied to the directories:
We can use all Ivy resolvers to define upload repositories.
Uploading to a Maven repository If we want to upload to a Maven repository, we must create a Maven POM (Project Object Model) file.
The Maven POM file contains all necessary information about our artifact.
We must add the Maven plugin to our project in order to make this work.
We must configure the repository for our uploadArchives task via a closure will define a Maven repository with the file protocol:
Note that we set the group property of our project so it can be used as the groupId of the Maven POM.
The version property is used as the version and the archivesBaseName property is used as the artifact ID.
We can invoke the uploadArchives task to deploy our artifact:
The contents of the generated POM file gradle-sample-1.0.pom are as follows:
Gradle uses the native Maven ANT tasks to deploy the artifacts to a Maven repository.
The file protocol is supported without any extra configuration, but if we want to use other protocols we must configure the libraries those protocols depend on.
The Maven plugin also adds the install task to our project.
With the install task, we can install the artifact to our local Maven repository.
Gradle will use the default location of the local Maven repository or the location that is defined in a Maven settings.xml file.
Multiple artifacts Until now, we have uploaded a single artifact to a repository.
In a Gradle project, we can define multiple artifacts and deploy them.
We need to define an archive task and assign it to a configuration.
We use the artifacts{} script block to define a configuration closure, to assign an artifact to a configuration.
The artifact is then deployed to a repository when we execute the upload task.
In the following sample build, we create JAR files with the source code and Javadoc documentation.
We assign both JAR files as artifacts to the archives configuration:
Signing artifacts We can digitally sign artifacts in Gradle with the signing plugin.
The plugin only has support for generating Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) signatures, which is the signature format required for publication to the Maven Central Repository.
To create a PGP signature we must install some PGP tools on our computers.
Installation of the tools is different for each operating system.
With the PGP software we need to create a key pair that we can use to sign our artifacts.
We need to configure the signing plugin with the information about our key pair.
We need the hexadecimal representation of the public key, the path to the secret key ring file with our private key, and the passphrase used to protect the private key.
The values of these properties are assigned to the Gradle project properties signing.keyId, signing.secretKeyRingFile, and signing.password.
The values of these properties are best kept secret, so it is better to store them in our gradle.properties file in the Gradle user directory and apply secure file permissions to the file.
It is best to make the file read-only for a single user.
The following sample gradle.properties file has the signing properties set.
The signing plugin has a DSL we can use to define which tasks or configurations we want signed.
In our sample Java project, we have the archives configuration with artifacts of to configure that all artifacts of the archives configuration need to be signed.
The following sample build file shows how we can do this:
The signing plugin adds a new task, named signArchives, to our project, because we have configured that we want the archives configuration to be signed.
The signing plugin adds tasks with the pattern sign<configurationName> to our project, for each configuration we configure to be signed.
We can invoke the signArchives task to sign our JAR artifact or use the jar task, which is automatically dependent on the signArchives task:
Note that the signature file gradle-sample-1.0.jar.asc is placed next to the artifact.
If the artifact we want to sign is not part of a configuration, we can use the signing DSL to configure a task to be signed.
The task must create an archive file in order to be used for signing.
After we have configured the task to be signed, the signing plugin adds a new task with the naming pattern sign<taskName>
We can execute that task to sign the output of the configured task.
The following build file has the task sourcesJar, to create a new archive with the source files of our project.
We use the signing DSL to configure our task for signing:
We can invoke the task signSourcesJar to digitally sign our JAR file with the sources of our project.
The generated signature file is placed next to the JAR file in the build/libs directory.
We can also invoke the assemble task to create the digitally signed JAR file, because this task is made dependent on all our archive tasks, including the signing tasks:
Publishing signature files To publish our signatures to a repository, we don't have to do anything special.
Gradle automatically adds the generated signature files to our archives configuration.
So, if we configure the uploadArchives task with a valid repository, we only have to run the uploadArchives task to upload both our artifacts with their signature files.
The following code adds the task sourcesJar to the build file, and we assign it to the archives configuration.
We configure the signing plugin to use the archives configuration to find the artifacts to sign.
Finally, we configure a simple file-based repository to store the artifacts with their signature files:
We can execute the task uploadArchives and look in the upload directory to see all the files that are created:
Configuring conditional signing With the signing DSL, we can also configure a condition to determine whether signing is required, for example, defining a condition to only sign the artifacts when the project is ready to be released.
In the sample build file, we only want to sign the artifacts if the uploadArchives task is part of the Gradle task graph to be executed and if the version of the project doesn't end with the String value DEV:
Packaging Java Enterprise Edition applications We have learned how to create ZIP, TAR, and JAR archives with Gradle in this chapter and the previous one.
In a Java project we can also package our applications as Web application Archive (WAR) or Enterprise Archive (EAR) files.
For a web application we would like to package our application as a WAR file, while a Java Enterprise Edition application can be packaged as an EAR file.
Gradle also supports these types of archives with plugins and tasks.
Creating a WAR file To create a WAR file we can add a new task of type War to our Java project.
The properties and methods of the War task are the same as for the other archive tasks such as Jar.
The webXml property can be used to reference a web.xml file that needs to be copied into the WAR file.
This is just another way to include a web.xml file; we can also place the web.xml file in the WEB-INF directory of the root source directory we defined for the WAR file.
If the file is a JAR or ZIP file, it is copied to the WEB-INF/lib directory and other files are copied into the WEB-INF/classes directory.
In the following sample build file we define a new task war.
And, we set a custom web.xml file with the webXml property of the task:
To create the WAR file we can execute the war or assemble task.
The war task is added to the assemble task as a task dependency.
That is why, if we invoke the assemble task, Gradle will execute the war task.
Once we have executed the task, the WAR file gradle-webapp-1.0.war is created in the directory build/libs:
Using the War plugin Instead of creating a War task ourselves, we can apply the War plugin in our project.
This plugin adds a war task for us that we can invoke.
Also, the default JAR archive is not created for our project any more, as part of the assemble task.
The plugin also adds two dependency configurations to our project, with the names providedCompile and providedRuntime.
Any dependencies added to these configurations are not copied to the WEB-INF/lib directory of our WAR file.
If a dependency exists both in the runtime and providedRuntime configuration, it is not copied to the WEB-INF/lib folder.
The default source directory for the contents of the WAR file is src/main/webapp.
We can change this with the property webAppDirName, if we want to use another directory.
This property is a convention property provided by the War plugin.
To customize the added war task, we still use the same methods and properties we have used for the war task we created ourselves.
In the sample build file, we now apply the War plugin.
We assign some dependencies to the extra dependency configurations and customize the war task:
Creating an EAR file To create an EAR file we can create a new task of type Ear.
This task has the same properties and methods as the Jar task.
We can execute the ear task and look in the build/libs directory to see the resulting gradle-enterprise-app-1.0.ear file:
Using the Ear plugin The best way to create an EAR file is by applying the Ear plugin to our project.
The plugin adds an ear task to our project and makes sure the assemble task will build the EAR file instead of the JAR file of the project.
The plugin also adds two new dependency configurations: deploy and earlib.
Dependencies assigned to the deploy configuration are copied to the root of the EAR file.
The dependencies assigned to the earlib configuration are transitive and are copied to the lib directory in the EAR file.
We can customize the name of the lib directory in the EAR file with the project or ear task property libDirName.
Any files in the src/main/application directory are also added to the EAR file.
We can change this directory location with the property appDirName, which is added by the plugin.
Here, we can place the file application.xml in the directory META-INF, as an EAR descriptor file.
In the sample build file, we apply the Ear plugin and customize the ear task:
We can run the assemble or ear task to create the EAR file gradle-enterpriseapp-1.0.ear in the directory build/libs:
Summary In this chapter, we have learned how we can run JUnit or TestNG tests from a Gradle build.
We have seen how to get the test results and reports that are generated by executing the tests.
With the application plugin, we have learned how to create a distributable ZIP file with all the code and scripts necessary to run the Java application we have built.
We have learned how to upload our project artifacts to a repository so other projects can use our code.
We have seen that we can use Gradle to create an artifact that is ready to be uploaded to a Maven repository.
To digitally sign our artifacts, we have seen how to use the signing plugin together with locally installed PGP tools.
Also, we have seen how we can use the War and Ear plugins to create web and enterprise applications with Gradle.
We can use tasks, methods, and configuration properties to configure the packaging output.
In the next chapter, we will look at how we can run and create a multi-module project with Gradle.
We will also learn how to create dependencies between projects and how to apply a common configuration to multiple projects at once.
Multi-project Builds When applications and projects get bigger, we usually split up several parts of the application into separate projects.
Gradle is also able to resolve dependencies between projects and will build the necessary projects in the right order.
So, we don't have to switch to a specific directory to build the code; Gradle will resolve the correct project order for us.
In this chapter we will learn about multi-project configuration and dependencies.
First, we will look at how we can configure projects and tasks.
Then we will use a multi-project Java application to learn how we can have inter-project dependencies and how Gradle resolves these for us.
Working with multi-project builds Let's start with a simple multi-project structure.
We have a root project called garden with two other projects, tree and flower.
We will add a new task printInfo to each of these projects.
The task will print out the name of the project to System.out.
We must add a file build.gradle to each project, with the following contents:
To execute the task for each project, we must first enter the correct directory and then invoke the task with Gradle.
Or, we run build.gradle for a specific project with the -b argument of Gradle.
We get the following output, if we run the task for each project:
We have multiple projects, but we haven't used Gradle's support for multi-project builds yet.
We need to add a new file, settings.gradle, in the garden directory.
In this file, we method to set the projects that are part of our multi-project build.
The project with the file settings.gradle is automatically part of the build.
We will use the following line in the settings.gradle file to define our multi-project build:
Now, we can execute the printInfo task for each project with a single command.
We get the following output if we execute the task:
Executing tasks by project path We see the output of each invocation of the task printInfo.
The root project is denoted by a colon (:) and has no explicit name.
The flower project is referenced as :flower, and the task printInfo of the flower project is referenced as :flower:printInfo.
The path of a task is the name of the project and a colon (:) followed by the task name.
We can reference a specific task in a project using this syntax as well, from the command line.
If we want to invoke the printInfo task of the flower project, we can run the following command:
This also works for executing tasks in a root project from another project directory.
If we first go to the flower project directory and want to execute the printInfo task of the root project, we must use the syntax :printInfo.
We get the following output, if we execute the printInfo task of the root project, the current project, and the flower project, from the tree project directory:
Gradle takes a couple of steps to determine whether a project must be executed as a single or multi-project build:
First, Gradle looks for a file settings.gradle in a directory with the name master, at the same level as the current directory.
If settings.gradle is not found, the parent directories of the current directory are searched for a settings.gradle file.
If settings.gradle is found, the project is executed as a single project build.
Otherwise, the project is executed as a single project build.
We can force Gradle to not look for a settings.gradle file in parent directories, with the command-line argument --no-search-upward (or -u)
Using a flat layout In our current project setup, we have defined a hierarchical layout of the projects.
We can also use a flat layout to set up our multi-project build.
We must first create a master directory in the garden directory.
The projects are referenced via the parent directory of the master directory.
So, if used to resolve the project directory is master/../tree.
To invoke the printInfo task for each project, we run Gradle from the master directory with the following command:
Defining projects We have added a build.gradle file to the tree and flower projects, with an implementation of the printInfo task.
But, with the multi-project support of Gradle, we don't have to do that.
We can define all project tasks and properties in the root build.gradle file.
We can use this to define common functionality for all projects, in a single place.
We must use a closure to define the tasks and properties of the project.
For our example project, we first remove the build.gradle files from the tree and flower directories.
Next, we change the build.gradle file in the master directory.
If we execute the printInfo task from the master directory, we see that all printInfo tasks of the projects are invoked:
Gradle also has the allprojects{} script block to apply project tasks and properties to all projects that are part of the multi-project build.
If we invoke the printInfo task from the master directory, we see that each project has the newly added task:
If we only want to configure the subprojects tree and flower, we must use the subprojects{} script block.
With this script block, only tasks and properties of the subprojects of a multi-project build are configured.
In the following example build file, we only configure the subprojects:
If we invoke the printInfo task, we see that our master project no longer has the printInfo task:
Gradle will not throw an exception if the printInfo task is not defined for a single project.
Gradle will first build a complete task graph for all the projects that are part of the multi-project build.
If any of the projects contains the task we want to run, the task for that project is executed.
Only when none of the projects has the task, will Gradle fail the build.
In the following sample build file, we add extra functionality to the printInfo task, at different levels:
Now when we execute the printInfo task, we get the following output:
We have added specific behavior to the tree and flower projects, with the the tree and flower projects and added the extra functionality there.
Filtering projects To apply specific configuration to more than one project, we can also use project define a filter based on the project names as argument of the method.
In a closure, we define the configuration for each found project.
In the following sample build file, we use a project filter to find the projects that have names that start with an f and then apply a configuration to the project:
We can also use project properties to define a filter.
Because project properties are only set after the build is defined, and project properties are set.
We pass our custom configuration as a closure to the.
In the following example build file, we read the project property hasLeaves for the projects tree and flower.
If the property is true, we customize the printInfo task for that project:
When we execute the printInfo task from the master directory, we get the following output:
Defining task dependencies between projects If we invoke the printInfo task, we see that the printInfo task of the flower project is executed before the tree project.
Gradle uses the alphabetical order of the projects, by default, to determine the execution order of the tasks.
We can change this execution order by defining explicit dependencies between tasks in different projects.
If we first want to execute the printInfo task of the tree project before the flower project, we can define that the printInfo task of the flower project depends on the printInfo task of the tree project.
In the following example build file, we will change the dependency of the printInfo task in the flower project.
If we execute the printInfo task, we see in the output that the printInfo task of the tree project is executed before the printInfo task of the flower project:
Defining configuration dependencies Besides task dependencies between projects, we can also include other configuration dependencies.
For example, we could have a project property, set by one project, that is used by another project.
In the next example, we create a new build.gradle file in the tree directory and set a property on the root project:
We also create a build.gradle file in the flower project and set a project property with a value based on the root project property set by the tree project:
When we execute the printInfo task, we get the following output:
Note that the printInfo task in the flower project cannot display the value of the root project property, because the value is not yet set by the tree project.
To change the evaluation order of the project, we can explicitly define that the method.
We change the build.gradle file in the flower directory and add evaluationDependsOn(':tree') to the top of the file:
When we execute the printInfo task again, we see in the output that the value of the root project property is available in the flower project:
Working with Java multi-project builds In a Java project, we usually have compile or runtime dependencies between projects.
The output of one project is a compile dependency for another project, for example.
Let's create a Java project with a common project that contains a Java class used by other projects.
We will add a services project that references the class in the common project.
Finally, we will add a web project with a Java servlet class that uses classes from the services project.
Next, we create a build.gradle file in the root directory.
We apply the Java plugin to each subproject and add a testCompile dependency on the JUnit libraries.
This configuration is applied to each subproject in our build.
Our :services:sample project has a dependency on the common project.
We will configure this dependency method to define this inter-project dependency.
Our web project uses classes from both the :common and the :services:sample projects.
We only have to define the dependency on the :services:sample project.
Gradle will automatically add the dependencies for that project to the :web project.
In our project, this means the :common project is also added as a transitive project dependency, and we can use the Logger class from that project in our SampleServlet class.
We will add another external dependency for the Servlet API to our :web project and also apply the War plugin to our :web project:
These dependencies are used to evaluate the execution order of the projects.
Gradle will analyze the dependencies and then decide which project needs to be built first, so the resulting classes can be used by dependent projects.
Let's build our project with the following command from the root directory:
A lot of tasks are executed, but we don't have to worry about their dependencies.
Gradle will make sure the correct order of tasks is executed.
We can also have project dependencies based on a configuration in a project.
Suppose we define a separate JAR artifact with only the SampleService class in the :services:sample project.
We can add this as a separate dependency to our :web project.
In the following example build file, we create a new JAR file with the SampleService class and then use that as a lib dependency in the :web project:
Using partial builds Because of the lib dependencies between the projects, we can execute partial builds in Gradle.
This means we don't have to be in the root directory of our project to build the necessary projects.
We can change to a project directory and invoke the build task from there, and Gradle will build all necessary projects first and then the current project.
Let's change to the services/sample directory and invoke the build task from there and look at the output:
If we don't want the projects we are dependent on to be built, we must use the --no-rebuild (or -a) command-line argument.
Gradle will now skip the building of projects that our project depends on and will use cached versions of the dependencies.
When we use the -a argument, while invoking the build task, we get the following output:
If we invoke the build task on our :services:sample project, the :common project is also built.
But there is a catch, as only the jar task of the :common project is executed.
Normally, the build task also runs tests and executes the check task.
Gradle will skip those tasks only if the project is built as a lib dependency.
If we want to execute the tests and checks for the dependency projects, we must execute the buildNeeded task.
Gradle will then do a complete build of all dependent projects.
Let's execute the buildNeeded task from the services/sample directory and look at the output:
If we have made changes to our :services:sample project, we might also want projects that are dependent on the sample project to be built.
We can use this to make sure we have not broken any code that depends on our project.
For example, let's execute this task from our :services:sample project; our :web project is also built because it has a dependency on the :services:sample project.
We get the following output when we execute the buildDependents task:
Using the Jetty plugin In the previous section, we created a Java project with a web subproject.
To execute the servlet, we must create a WAR file and deploy the WAR file to a servlet container such as Tomcat or Jetty.
With the Jetty plugin, we can run our web project from the command line in a Jetty web container.
We don't have to install Jetty on our computer; we only need to apply the Jetty plugin to our project.
The plugin will take care of configuring Jetty and starting the web container.
If everything is okay, we can open a web browser and access our servlet.
To add the Jetty plugin to our web project, let's create a new file, build.gradle, the project:
The plugin adds the following tasks to our project: jettyRun, jettyRunWar, and jettyStop.
We can test our servlet in a web browser after we execute the jettyRun or jettyWar task.
We get the following output when we execute the jettyRun task from the root of the multi-project build:
Gradle will keep running, and at the end, we see that the application is running at http://localhost:8080/web.
We can open a web browser and access our web application.
In the following screenshot, we see the output of the servlet:
To stop the Jetty web container, we press Ctrl + C at the command line, to return to our prompt.
We can change the port number via the Project convention property, httpPort, added by the Jetty plugin or the task property, httpPort, of the jettyRun and jettyRunWar tasks.
To change the context path, we can set the contextPath property of the jettyRun and jettyRunWar tasks.
If we want the Jetty container to automatically scan for changes, we can set the reload property to automatic.
If the property is set to manual, we must press Enter on the command line, to reload changes.
We can set the scan interval in seconds, with the property scanIntervalSeconds.
In the following sample build file, we customize the Jetty web container with another HTTP port, context path, and automatic reloading:
We can even customize the Jetty container further with custom Jetty configuration files.
We could use the jettyRun task property, jettyConfig, to use configuration files.
Or, we can add extra runtime libraries with the additionalRuntimeJars property.
If we want to use the jettyStop task, we must also define the stopPort and stopKey properties in either our Project or task.
If we have defined these properties, we can open a new command-line prompt and invoke the jettyStop task to stop a running Jetty web container.
In the following example build file, we apply some of these properties and methods to customize the Jetty configuration:
We can use a hierarchical layout as project structure, but we can easily customize this and use other layouts.
Configuring projects is easy and can be done in one place, at the root of the projects.
We can also add project configurations at the project level itself.
Not only can we define dependencies between projects on a project library level, but we can also do so via configuration or task dependencies.
Gradle will resolve the correct way to build the complete project, so we don't have to worry too much about that.
Because Gradle knows which projects will be involved before a task is executed, we can do partial multi-project builds.
Gradle will automatically build project dependencies, which are necessary for our current project.
And we can use a single task to build the projects that depend on our current project.
Finally, we saw how we can run our web application code in a Jetty web container, with the Jetty plugin.
We apply the plugin and execute the jettyRun or jettyRunWar tasks to run our code as a web application.
We can open a web browser and execute our code.
In the next chapter, we will look at how we can use other languages besides Java, with Gradle.
Mixed Languages We have seen how to use Gradle for projects with Java code.
In the last couple of years, other languages for Java Virtual Machine have emerged.
In this chapter, we will take a look at Gradle's support for the Groovy and Scala languages.
We will see how we can apply the correct plugin and configuration to our Gradle build files to work with the different languages.
Javascript and Closure plugins are available as third-party plugins, which add support for those languages.
Using the Groovy plugin To use Groovy sources in our project, we can apply the Groovy plugin.
The Groovy plugin makes it possible to compile Groovy source files to class files.
The project can contain both Java and Groovy source files.
The compiler that Gradle uses is a joint compiler that can compile Java and Groovy source files.
To compile the Groovy source files we can invoke the compileGroovy task.
Test sources written in Groovy can be compiled with the compileTestGroovy task.
Also, a compile<SourceSet>Groovy task is added for each extra source set in our build definition.
So, if we create a new source set with the name api, there will be a compileApiGroovy task.
In the following example build file, we apply the Groovy plugin:
If we invoke the tasks task to see what is available, we get the following output:
Pattern: upload<ConfigurationName>: Assembles and uploads the artifacts belonging to a configuration.
Note that we also got all the tasks from the Java plugin.
This is because the Groovy plugin automatically includes the Java plugin.
So, even though we only defined the Groovy plugin in our build file, the Java plugin is applied as well.
The extra compileGroovy and compileTestGroovy tasks are visible in the command output.
The new tasks are dependency tasks for the classes and testClasses tasks.
If we invoke the classes task, the compileGroovy task is also executed.
So, to compile Groovy source files in our project, we must set a dependency on the groovy configuration.
To compile Groovy source files, we must add a dependency, with the Groovy library we want to use, to the groovy configuration.
We might expect that Gradle will use the Groovy version that is used by Gradle, but the compilation task is independent of the Groovy version used by Gradle.
It is good to be independent of the Groovy libraries shipped with Gradle, because we can now use the Groovy version we really need.
When we do want to use the Groovy libraries shipped with Gradle, we can use the special dependency development it is useful.
First, we create a Groovy source file so we can compile it with Gradle.
The default source directory for Groovy source files is src/main/groovy.
Let's create a new file, in the directory src/main/groovy/gradle/sample, with the name Sample.groovy.
Next, we create a Gradle build file and apply the Groovy plugin.
We add the Maven central repository and a Groovy dependency to the groovy configuration:
When we run the build task, we get the following output:
When we don't have the specified Groovy library in our cache, it is downloaded from the Maven repository, by Gradle.
The source code file is compiled, and if we look in the build/classes directory, we see the compiled class file.
Contains both .java and .groovy source files if they are in the groovy directory.
All files with extension .groovy are part of this collection.
We extend our previous build file and add the task groovySourceSetsProperties.
We print out the extra properties and their values with this task.
When we run the task groovySourceSetProperties on the command line, we see the following output:
When our Java code uses Groovy classes, and vice versa, we can use the joint compilation feature.
We must make sure both the Java and Groovy source files are in the src/main/groovy directory.
Creating documentation with the Groovy plugin The Groovy plugin also adds the groovydoc task.
The groovydoc task is like the javadoc task from the Java plugin.
Gradle uses the Groovydoc tool, which is available from the Groovy version that we have defined as a dependency to the groovy configuration.
For example, we can set the header and footer to be used in the generated documentation.
In the following build file, we configure the groovydoc task:
When we run the groovydoc task, we can see the generated documentation in the build/docs/groovydoc directory.
We must open the index.html file in our web browser to see the result.
Using the Scala plugin We can also use Gradle to work with Scala source files.
We can have a Scala-only project, or we can have both Java and Scala source files in our project.
We must apply the Scala plugin to enable Scala support for our build.
The plugin adds new tasks to compile the Scala source files.
With the compileScala task, we compile our main Scala source files.
The compileTestScala task compiles all Scala source code files that are in the src/ test/scala directory.
The plugin also adds a compile<SourceSet>Scala task for custom-defined source sets in our build.
The compile tasks support both Java and Scala source files with joint compilation.
We can place our Java source files in say the src/main/java directory of our project and the Scala source files in the src/main/scala directory.
To be able to compile the files, we must add dependencies to the Scala tools in our build file.
The Scala plugin adds the scalaTools dependency configuration to our build.
We must assign the correct dependencies from a Maven repository to this configuration, so that Gradle can invoke the compiler to compile the source files.
Let's create a simple Scala source file in the directory src/main/scala/gradle/ sample and save it as Sample.scala:
In the following example build file, we apply the Scala plugin.
Also, in the dependencies section we set the correct dependencies for the compiler:
To build the project, we invoke the build task and get the following output:
Note how the compileScala and compileTestScala tasks are dependency tasks for the classes and testClasses tasks respectively.
So, the newly added tasks are automatically part of the normal build tasks we know from our Java projects.
The Scala plugin will even automatically include the Java plugin, if we don't apply the Java plugin ourselves.
We can define a custom source set in our project.
The Scala plugin adds a compile task for each source set to our project.
In the following Gradle build file, we add a new source set with the name actors:
When we invoke the tasks command, we see that Gradle added compileActorsScala to the list of available tasks:
The task actorsClasses is added and has all the compile tasks for the actors source set.
When we want the actorsClasses task to be part of the build task, we can assign it as a task dependency to the jar task.
In the following example actors source set as part of the JAR file contents:
When we execute the build task, our source files in the source set actors are compiled and added to the JAR file.
The Scala plugin also adds several new properties to a source set.
SourceDirectorySet The Scala source files for this project; contains both .java and .scala source files if they are in the scala directory.
Directories with the Scala source files; can also contain Java source files for joint compilation.
All files with extension .scala are part of this collection.
Let's create a new task, scalaSourceSetsProperties, to see the contents of each of these properties:
When we invoke the scalaSourceSetsProperties task from the command-line, we get the following output:
Creating documentation with the Scala plugin The Scala plugin also adds a scaladoc task to our build.
We can use this task to generate documentation from the source files.
This is like the javadoc task from the Java plugin.
We can configure the scaladoc task to provide extra options.
In the following example build file, we add a title to the generated documentation by configuring the scaladoc task:
When we invoke the scaladoc task, Gradle will generate the documentation, and the result is in build/docs/scaladoc.
We can open the file index.html in our web browser to see the generated documentation.
Summary In this chapter, we learned how we can work with Groovy and Scala source files in a Gradle project.
We applied the Groovy or Scala plugins to our project and saw that Gradle added the tasks to compile the source files, to the project.
We learned that we must add a dependency to the correct Groovy or Scala version to the dependency configuration added by the plugin.
We also learned that the plugins also provide some new properties for source sets so we can, for example, find all Groovy or Scala source files in a source set.
In the next chapter, we take a look at how we can add code quality tools to our Gradle builds.
Maintaining Code Quality While working on a project, we want to have some kind of tooling or process in place that we can use to see if our code follows certain standards; either our code has no common coding problems or calculates the complexity of the code.
Better code means it will be easier to maintain, and this lowers the cost of maintaining the code.
In a project team, we want to make sure that the code follows the same standards defined by the project team.
A company could define a set of standards that developers need to follow, as a condition for the project to be started.
There are tools already available for Java and Groovy projects to analyze and check source code, such as Checkstyle, JDepend, PMD, FindBugs, CodeNarc, and Sonar.
In this chapter, we will take a look at the plugins and learn how to use them in our projects.
Using the Checkstyle plugin If we are working on a Java project, and apply the Java plugin to our project, we get an empty task with the name check.
This means that when we execute the build task, the check task is executed as well.
We can write our own tasks to check something in our project and make it a dependency task for the check task.
So if the check task is executed, our own task is executed as well.
And not only the tasks we write ourselves, but the plugins also, can add new dependency tasks to the check task.
We will see in this chapter that most plugins will add one or more tasks as a dependency task to the check task.
This means that we can apply a plugin to our project, and when we invoke the check or build task, the extra tasks of the plugin are executed automatically.
Also, the check task is dependent on the test task.
Gradle will always make sure the test task is executed before the check task, so we know that all source files and test source files are compiled, and tests are run before the code is checked.
To add the Checkstyle analysis to our project, we simply have to apply the Checkstyle plugin:
If we invoke the tasks task from the command line, we can see that new tasks have been added by the plugin:
The tasks checkstyleMain and checkstyleTest are added as a dependency for the check task.
The tasks run the Checkstyle analysis for the main and test classes.
We cannot execute these tasks yet, because we have to add a Checkstyle configuration file to our project.
This file contains the rules that we want applied for our code.
The plugin will look for a file checkstyle.xml in the directory config/checkstyle in our project.
This is the default location and filename, but we can change it.
The Checkstyle plugin does not add the required library dependencies to our project automatically.
We need to add an appropriate repository to our project so that the Checkstyle plugin can download all the dependencies.
Let's create the following example build file and add the repository definition:
Now we can run the check task and see the output:
Run with --info or --debug option to get more log output.
The checkstyleMain task has been executed and the build has failed, because our code doesn't follow our Checkstyle rules.
In the output, we can see all the violations of the rules.
Gradle will also create an XML file with the violations in the build/ reports/checkstyle directory.
If we don't want the build to fail, we can use the property ignoreFailures of the checkstyle tasks.
The checks are still executed and the report file is generated, but the build will not fail.
We can configure the Checkstyle plugin with the checkstyle{} script block or the checkstyle property in a Gradle build.
The script block accepts a configuration closure where we can change the properties.
In the following build file, we set the ignoreFailures property to true, so the build will not fail even after Checkstyle finds errors:
While this book was being written, Gradle used Checkstyle 5.5
To change the version, we can set the toolVersion property to another version.
For example, if, in the future, Checkstyle 5.6 is released, then we simply have to change the toolVersion property and don't need a new Gradle version.
In the following example build file, we set the Checkstyle version to 5.4 by changing the toolVersion property.
We might need to do this for legacy projects too:
To change the Checkstyle configuration file, we can set the property configFile to a different value.
We can, for example, copy the sun_checks.xml configuration file from a Checkstyle distribution to the config/checkstyle directory.
We set the configFile property with the value of this new file, and our code is checked using the rules from the sun_checks.xml configuration file.
This sample build file shows that we have referenced another Checkstyle configuration file:
This means that the configuration file has variable property values with the syntax ${propertyName}
We can set the value for such a property by using the configProperties property of the Checkstyle configuration closure.
This property accepts a map, where the keys are the property names from the Checkstyle configuration file and the values are the property values.
If the Checkstyle configuration file has a property with the name tabWidth, for example, we can set the value with the following example build file:
Set checkstyle options, that are used by // all checkstyle tasks.
We use the checkstyle{} script block to change the properties for all the checkstyle tasks in a project.
But we can also configure individual checkstyle tasks in our build file.
We have got the checkstyleMain and checkstyleTest tasks, and we can alter their configuration just like any other task.
Let's create the following example build file and change the properties of the checkstyleTest task, which will override the properties set in the checkstyle{} script block:
Set checkstyle options, that are used by // all checkstyle tasks.
If we have defined custom source sets in our build, then the Checkstyle plugin automatically adds a checkstyle<SourceSet> task to the project.
If our source set is named api, then we can invoke the checkstyleApi task to only check this source set.
The checkstyleApi task is also added as a dependency task for the check task.
So once we run the check task, Gradle will invoke the checkstyleApi task as well.
In this example build file, we create a new source set with the name api:
If we invoke the tasks task, we can see in the output that a newly created task checkstyleApi is added, which is a dependency task for the check task:
The report XML files that are generated are placed in the build/reports/ checkstyle directory.
The name of the files is based on the source set name.
So the checkstyleMain task will generate the report file build/reports/checkstyle/ main.xml.
We can change the reports output directory with the reportsDir property.
We can change the destination file for a specific checkstyle task with the destination property.
We can also disable the report generation with the enabled property, for a given task.
The following sample build file changes the reporting directory, the destination file for the checkstyleMain task, and disables report generation for the checkstyleTest task:
Using the PMD plugin Another tool for analyzing the Java source code is PMD.
It finds unused variables, empty catch blocks, unnecessary object creation, and so forth.
We can configure our own rule sets and even define our own rules.
To use PMD with Gradle, we have to apply the PMD plugin to our build.
After we have added the plugin, we have the pmdMain and pmdTest tasks already installed.
These tasks will run PMD rules for the main and test source sets.
If we have a custom source set, then the plugin adds a pmd<SourceSet> task as well.
These tasks are also dependency tasks of the check task.
So if we invoke the check task, all the pmd tasks are executed as well.
This plugin only defines a structure to work with PMD, but doesn't contain the actual PMD library dependencies.
Gradle will download the PMD dependencies the first time that we invoke the pmd tasks.
We have to define a repository that contains the PMD libraries, such as the Maven Central repository or a corporate intranet repository.
In the following build file, we apply the PMD plugin and define a custom source set:
When we invoke the check task, and if there are no rule violations, we get the following output:
Note the pmdMain, pmdTest, and pmdUtil tasks that are executed.
If one of the files has a violation, then the build will fail by default.
We can set the ignoreFailures property for the pmd tasks to true, so the build will not fail.
The following sample build shows how we can set the property ignoreFailures to true:
Don't fail the build process when // rule violations are found.
Rule violations will be reported in an XML and HTML file in the build/reports/ pmd directory.
The name of the file is the same as the source set name.
We can change the name of the reporting directory and the output filename, or we can also disable the report generation.
The following example build file changes several properties of the reporting by the pmd tasks:
Only the basic rule set of PMD is applied if we don't define anything else in the build file.
To change which rules are applied, we can use the rules property and new rules.
With the rules property, we have to define all the rules we want to use as a property assignment.
Besides configuring the rules, we can also assign rule set files for the pmd tasks.
A rule set file contains several rules and allows customization of the rules.
To add a We need to reference a file to set the property or pass it as a method argument.
The following sample build file shows how we can set rules and rule set files:
To change the version of PMD that we want to use, we must set the property toolVersion of the PDM plugin.
When this book was being written, this was set to version 4.3, but we can change it to other versions if required.
In the following example build file, we simply change the version to 4.2 with the toolVersion property:
Using the FindBugs plugin FindBugs is another library that we can use to analyze our source code.
To use FindBugs in our Gradle builds, we simply have to apply the FindBugs plugin.
We can either apply one source code analysis plugin to our project, or we can apply multiple plugins.
It just depends on what we want to check or what is prescribed per company policy.
The plugin will add the tasks findbugsMain and findbugsTest to analyze the source code from the main and test source sets.
If we have a custom source set, then the task findbugs<SourceSet> is also added to the plugin.
These tasks are all dependency tasks for the check task.
Just as with the other code quality plugins, the FindBugs dependencies are not included with Gradle, but will be downloaded the first time we use the findbugs tasks.
We must include a repository definition that will enable Gradle to find the FindBugs dependencies.
To change the FindBugs version that is being used, we.
In the following build file, we apply the FindBugs plugin and configure an extra source set with the name webservice:
When we execute the tasks task, we see that the findbugsMain, findbugsTest, and findbugsWebservice tasks are dependencies for the check task:
If FindBugs finds violations of the rules in our source, then the build will fail.
We can set the property ignoreFailures to true, as shown in the following lines of code, to make sure the build will continue even if violations are found:
The plugin generates an XML report with the result of the FindBugs analysis in the directory build/reports/findbugs.
The name of the XML file is the same as the name of the source set that is analyzed.
We can also configure the plugin that an HTML report generates.
In the following build file, we configure the reporting in the FindBugs plugin:
If we want to use FindBugs plugins, we can define them as dependencies.
We can assign plugin dependencies to this configuration, and the findbugs tasks will use these plugins to analyze the code.
Using the JDepend plugin To get quality metrics for our code base, we can use JDepend.
JDepend traverses the generated class files in our project and generates design quality metrics.
To use JDepend, we simply have to apply the JDepend plugin in our project.
For each extra source set in our project, a jdepend<SourceSet> task is added.
These tasks are all dependency tasks of the check task.
We must configure a repository so Gradle can fetch the JDepend dependencies.
Gradle doesn't provide the JDepend libraries in the Gradle distribution.
This means that we can easily use another version of JDepend, independent of the Gradle version we are using.
We see this behavior in the other code quality plugins as well.
To change a version number, we simply have to set the toolVersion property of the JDepend plugin.
In the following example build file, we apply the JDepend plugin and create an extra source set:
We can change the version of JDepend to be used.
When we invoke the tasks task, we will see that three jdepend tasks are created as a dependency for the check task:
The results are stored in an XML file in the build/reports/jdepend directory.
We can configure the JDepend plugin so the directory that we store the reports in is different.
For each jdepend task, we can also alter the output format.
Instead of XML, we can generate a text file with the statistics about our code.
We have to choose between XML and text; we cannot choose both report outputs for a single jdepend task.
The following sample build file shows several options on how we can change the reports with information about our source code:
Using the CodeNarc plugin To check code written in the Groovy language, we can use CodeNarc.
CodeNarc has several rules to do a static analysis of Groovy code.
Gradle has a CodeNarc plugin, so we can apply the rules from CodeNarc to our Groovy code base.
If we apply the plugin, we automatically get a codenarcMain and codenarcTest target.
Also, for each custom source set, we get a new task named codenarc<SourceSet>
All these tasks are dependency tasks of the check task.
We need to define a repository in our build file that contains CodeNarc.
If we invoke a codenarc task, then Gradle sets CodeNarc dependencies.
We can change the version of CodeNarc that we want to use by setting the codenarc.toolVersion property.
The plugin defines that we provide a CodeNarc configuration file with the name codenarc.xml in the directory config/codenarc.
We can change the reference to the configuration file with the configFile property of the plugin.
Let's create the following example build file and apply the CodeNarc plugin for a Groovy project.
We will change the version of CodeNarc that we want to use.
We will also redefine the location of the CodeNarc configuration file to config/ codenarc/custom.xml:
When we run the check task and our Groovy code base starts violating the configured CodeNarc rules, the build will fail.
If we don't want the build to fail on a violation, we can set the property ignoreFailures to true.
We can set this for all codenarc tasks with the codenarc.ignoreFailures property.
We can also set this property for individual codenarc tasks.
The following build file shows that we set the property ignoreFailures for all the codenarc tasks:
The codenarc tasks create an HTML report with the found results, and place it in the build/reports/codenarc directory.
The name of the file is defined by the source set name for which the task is executed.
We can set the output to XML or text file formats.
We can change the format output directory, we can set the property codenarc.reportsDir in our project:
Using the Sonar plugin Sonar is a complete platform to monitor code quality in a project.
Sonar has a web-based dashboard where code quality can be monitored in due time, so we can see if our code has improved over time by using Sonar.
When we apply the plugin, a new task—sonarAnalyze- is added to our project.
This task is not a dependency task for the check task, but is a standalone task.
The task can analyze not only class files, but also test results, so we can make sure that the build task is executed before the sonarAnalyze task, to add a dependency on the build task to the sonarAnalyze task.
In the following example build file, we will apply the Sonar plugin, and if Sonar is running locally, we can simply execute the sonarAnalyze task:
If we run Sonar locally, we don't have to configure anything.
Gradle will use the default settings to access the locally running Sonar server.
We can configure the Sonar plugin to use a different address and database settings with the sonar{} script block.
The script block accepts a configuration closure with several sections for the server and its database properties.
The following build file has different settings for the Sonar server URL and database properties:
For example, we can change the directory where the Sonar client library files are stored after being downloaded from the Sonar server.
We can define the location of the Clover or Cobertura coverage XML result file and much more.
The plugin already uses a lot of default values from project properties.
For example, the version and group properties of a project are used to identify the project in Sonar.
The following table shows all the properties we can set via the.
String reuseReports Dynamic analysis includes the analysis of test and coverage results.
We can set the value to reuseReports, so reports from testReports, clover ReportPath, and coberturaReport Path are used for analysis.
The value can be set to false so no dynamic analysis is performed, or true (which is not supported by Gradle) so that Sonar will produce the test and coverage reports.
Specific settings for Java source code, such as source compatibility.
String null Pattern of source files to be excluded from analysis.
The following example build file shows several properties that we need to change:
A map of the properties is the argument of the closure.
In the following build file, we will see how we can use this mechanism to further customize the Sonar plugin:
Summary We learned in this chapter that it is easy to use code analysis tools in a Gradle project.
All the plugins of these tools add new tasks to our project, for each source set to do the analysis.
Each of these tasks is a dependency task for the check task.
So when we apply the plugin in a normal build, the code analysis will take place.
Also, we learned that the usage and syntax are mostly identical for each plugin.
With the Sonar plugin, we can send the analysis data of our project to a Sonar server.
This task is a standalone task that is not part of a normal build process.
In the next chapter, we will take a look at how we can write our own custom task and plugin.
We'll learn how we can make it reusable in other Gradle builds.
In Gradle, we can either write a simple task in a build file where we add actions with a closure, or we can configure an existing task that is included with Gradle.
There are different ways in which we can create a custom task, which we will cover in this chapter.
We will see how we can create a new task class in our build file and use it in our project.
Next, we will learn how to create custom tasks in a separate source file.
We also learn in this chapter how we can make our task reusable in other projects.
We will learn how to write a plugin for Gradle.
Similar to writing custom tasks, we will cover the different ways to write a plugin.
We will also see how we can publish our plugin and learn how we can use it in a new project.
We can write our tasks and plugins in Groovy, which works very well with the Gradle API, but we can also use other languages, such as Java and Scala.
As long as the code is compiled into bytecode, we are fine.
Creating a custom task When we create a new task in a build and specify a task with the type property, we actually configure an existing task.
The existing task is called an enhanced task in Gradle.
For example, the Copy task type is an enhanced task.
We configure the task in our build file, but the implementation of the Copy task is in a separate class file.
It is a good practice to separate the task usage from the task implementation.
In this section, we are creating our own enhanced tasks.
Creating a custom task in the build file First, let's see how we can create a task to display the current Gradle version in our build by simply adding a new task with a simple action.
We have seen these types of tasks earlier in other sample build files.
In the following sample build, we create a new info task:
When we invoke the info task from the command line, we see the following output:
Now, we are going to create a new task definition in our build file and make it an enhanced task.
We create a new class in our build file and this class extends org.
We write an implementation for the class by adding a new method.
To indicate that the method is the action of the class, we use the annotation @TaskAction.
After we have defined our task class, we can use it in our build file.
We add a task to the project tasks container and use the type property to reference our new task class.
In the following sample build file, we have a new task class InfoTask and the task info that uses this new task class:
When we run our build file, the info task is invoked automatically because it is a part of the default tasks for the project.
In the following output, we can see our current Gradle version:
To customize our simple task, we can add properties to our task.
We can assign values to these properties when we configure the task in our build file.
For our sample task, we first add a prefix property.
This property is used when we print the Gradle version instead of the text 'Current Gradle version:'
We give it a default value, so when we use the task and don't set the property value, we still get a meaningful prefix.
We can mark our property as optional, because of the default value, with the annotation @Optional.
This way, we have documented that our property doesn't need to be configured when we use the task:
If we want another prefix in our output, we can configure the info task in our build file.
We assign the 'Running Gradle' value to the prefix property of our InfoTask:
Now, if we run our build file, we can see our new prefix value in the output:
Using incremental build support We know Gradle supports incremental builds.
This means that Gradle can check if a task has any dependencies for input or output on files, directories, and properties.
If none of these have changed since the last build, the task is not executed.
We will learn how we can use annotations with our task properties to make sure our task supports Gradle's incremental build feature.
We have seen how we can use the inputs and outputs properties of tasks we have created so far.
To indicate which properties of our new enhanced tasks are input and output properties, the ones used by Gradle's incremental support, we must add certain annotations to our class definition.
We can assign the annotation to the field property or the getter method for the property.
In a previous chapter, we have created a task that reads a XML source file and converts the contents to a text file.
We use the @InputFile annotation for the property that holds the value for the source XML file.
The @OutputFile annotation is assigned to the property that holds the output file:
Let's create an XML file with the name source.xml in the current directory, with the following code:
Now, we can invoke the convert task in our build file.
We can see in the output that the file is converted:
If we look at the contents of the convert-output.txt file, we see the following values from the source file:
When we invoke the convert task for the second time, we can see Gradle's incremental build support has noticed that the input and output file haven't changed, so our task is up-to-date:
The following table shows the annotations we can use to indicate the input and output properties of our enhanced task:
If the output directory doesn't exist, it will be created.
The value doesn't have to be applied for this property.
This way, we can use arbitrary objects as input or output properties.
Creating a task in the project source directory In the previous section we have defined and used our own enhanced task in the same build file.
Next, we are going to extract the class definition from the build file and put it in a separate file.
We are going to place the file in the buildSrc project source directory.
Let's move our InfoTask to the buildSrc directory of our project.
We create a file named InfoTask.groovy in this directory, with the following code:
Notice that we must add import statements for the classes of the Gradle API.
These outside the build script, we must add the import statements ourselves.
In our project build file, we only have to create a new info task of type InfoTask.
Notice that we must use the package name to identify our InfoTask class or add an import sample.InfoTask statement:
If we run the build, we can see that Gradle first compiles the InfoTask.groovy source file:
As a matter of fact, the build task of the buildSrc directory is executed.
We can customize the build of the buildSrc directory by adding a build.gradle file.
In this file, we can configure the tasks, add new tasks, and do practically anything we can in a normal project build file.
Let's add a new build.gradle file in the buildSrc directory.
We add a simple action to the build task, which prints the value 'Done building buildSrc':
If we run our project build, we can see the following output:
Writing tests As the buildSrc directory is similar to any other Java/Groovy project, we can also create tests for our task.
We have the same directory structure as that of a Java/ Groovy project, and we can also define extra dependencies in the build.gradle file.
If we want to access a Project object in our test class, we can use the org.gradle.
With this class, we can configure a Project object and use it in our test case.
We can optionally configure the name, parent, and We can use the Project object, for example, to add a new task with the type of our new enhanced task and see if there are any errors.
In the following JUnit test, we test if the property value can be set.
We have a second test to check if the task of type InfoTask is added to the task container of a project:
In our build.gradle file in the buildSrc directory, we must add a Maven repository and the dependency on the JUnit libraries by using the following lines of code:
Our test is automatically executed because the test task is part of the build process for the buildSrc directory.
Creating a task in a standalone project To make a task reusable for other projects, we must have a way to distribute the task.
Also, other projects that want to use the task must be able to find our task.
We will see how we can publish our task in a repository and how other projects can use the task in their projects.
We have seen how we can place the task implementation from the build file into the buildSrc directory.
The buildSrc directory is similar to a normal Gradle build project, so it is easy to create a standalone project for our task.
We only have to copy the contents of the buildSrc directory to our newly created project directory.
Let's create a new project directory and copy the contents of the buildSrc directory.
We must edit the build.gradle file of our standalone project.
Gradle implicitly added the Groovy plugin and dependencies on the Gradle API and Groovy for us when the build.gradle file is in the buildSrc directory.
Now we have a standalone project, and we must add those dependencies ourselves.
The following build.gradle file has all the definitions necessary to build and deploy our artifact to a local distribution directory.
We could also define a corporate intranet repository so that other projects can re-use our InfoTask in their projects.
When we invoke the uploadArchives task to publish our packaged InfoTask in the ../lib directory, we see the following output:
We have published our task, and other projects can use it in their builds.
Remember that anything in the buildSrc directory of a project is added automatically to the classpath of the build.
But if we have a published artifact with the task, this will not happen automatically.
We must configure our build and add the artifact as a dependency of the build script.
We use the buildscript{} script block in our build to configure the classpath of our Gradle project.
To include our published InfoTask in a new project, we must add the artifact as a classpath configuration dependency for our build.
We create a new directory and add the following build.gradle file to the directory:
Next, we can run the build and see in the output that the InfoTask is executed:
Creating a custom plugin One of the great features of Gradle is the support for plugins.
A plugin can contain tasks, configurations, properties, methods, concepts, and more to add extra functionality to our projects.
For example, if we apply the Java plugin to our project, we can immediately invoke the compile, test, and build tasks.
Also, we have new dependency configurations we can use and extra properties we can configure.
The java-base plugin doesn't introduce tasks, but the concept of source sets.
This is a good pattern for creating our own plugins, where a base plugin introduces new concepts and another plugin derives from the base plugin and adds explicit build logic-like tasks.
So a plugin is a good way to distribute build logic that we want to share between projects.
We can write our own plugin, give it an explicit version, and publish it to, for example, a repository.
Other projects can then re-use the functionality by simply applying the plugin to a project.
We can create our own plugins and use them in our projects.
We start by defining the plugin in the build file.
Creating a plugin in the build file We can create a custom plugin right in the project build file.
Similar to a custom task, we can add a new class definition with the logic of the plugin.
We must implement the When we write our own plugin, we must override this method.
The type of the object is the same as the generic type T.
When we create a plugin for projects, the type Project is used.
We can also write plugins for other Gradle types, like tasks.
We are going to create a simple plugin that will print out the Gradle version.
The plugin adds a new info task to the project.
The following sample build file defines a new task to the project, with the name info.
From the command line, we can invoke the info task when we run Gradle.
We can see the Gradle version in the following output:
The info task always prints the same text before the Gradle version.
We can rewrite the task and make the text configurable.
This object can hold all settings and properties we want to pass to a plugin.
We can add a Java Bean to ExtensionContainer so that we can configure the bean's properties from the build file.
In our sample build file, we first add a new class InfoPluginExtension with a property prefix of type String.
This is the Java Bean-compliant class we add of ExtensionContainer to add InfoPluginExtension with the name info to the project.
In the build file, we configure the prefix property using the info configuration closure.
Or we can simply reference the prefix property through the info extension object:
Add the Java Bean InfoPluginExtension with the // name info to the project ExtensionContainer.
If we run the info task, we see our configured prefix in the output:
Creating a plugin in the project source directory We have defined the plugin and used the plugin in the same build file.
We will see how we can extract the plugin code from the build file and put it in a separate source file in the project source directory.
Also, we will learn how we can test the plugin.
When we define the plugin in our build file, we cannot re-use it in other projects.
And we now have the definition and usage of the plugin in the same file.
To separate the definition and usage, we can create the plugin class in the buildSrc directory of a Gradle project.
In a Gradle multi-project, we must use the buildSrc directory of the root project.
This means, for a multi-project build, we can re-use the plugin in the other projects of the multi-project build.
We already learned when we wrote a custom task that any sources in the buildSrc directory are automatically compiled and added to the classpath of the project.
In this directory, we create a file called InfoPlugin.groovy with the following code:
In our build file in the root of the project, we reference our plugin with the package and class name:
When we run the info task, we see in the output that first the plugin code is compiled, and then the info task is executed:
Testing a plugin One of the tasks that are executed for the project in the buildSrc directory is the test task.
We can write test cases for testing the plugin code, just like in any other project.
We add a build.gradle file in buildSrc and define the dependencies for the JUnit test framework.
In the following sample build file, we add a dependency for JUnit:
Next, we can add a test case named InfoPluginTest.groovy in the buildSrc/src/ test/groovy/sample directory:
We use the ProjectBuilder class to create a fixture for the Project object.
We can apply the plugin to the project and then test to see if the info task is available.
The Project object cannot execute tasks in the project; it is only for simple checks like this one.
When we invoke the info task from the command line, our test class is compiled and executed.
If a test fails, the project will abort, but if all tests pass, the project continues.
Creating a plugin in a standalone project We have defined our plugin in the project source directory, but we cannot re-use it in another project.
We will learn how we can distribute our plugin logic, using a standalone project.
Also, we will see how we can use the plugin in other projects.
By placing the plugin code in the buildSrc directory, we have separated the definition of the plugin and the usage.
To make the plugin reusable, we create a standalone project and create an artifact with the plugin code and publish the artifact to a repository.
Other projects can then get the plugin from the repository and use the build logic from the plugin in the project.
We already have the code for the plugin and the test code in the buildSrc directory (from the previous section)
We can copy this code to a new directory with the project for the plugin.
In this new directory, we must also create a build.gradle file.
The implicit dependencies and plugin added to a project in the buildSrc directory must be made explicit in a standalone project.
Let's create a new Gradle project in the directory plugin, and create the file build.
We copy the InfoPlugin.groovy and InfoPluginExtension.groovy files to the src/main/groovy/sample directory, and the InfoPluginTest.groovy file to the plugin/src/test/ groovy/sample directory.
So far we have all the ingredients to create an artifact JAR file with the plugin code.
We can, of course, define any Maven or Ivy repository to deploy the plugin artifact into.
To make sure Gradle can find the plugin, we must provide a properties file in the plugin/src/main/resources/META-INF/gradle-plugins directory with the name of our plugin.
The properties file has a property key implementation-class with the full class name of the Plugin class.
We want to name our plugin as info, so in the plugin/src/main/resources/ META-INF/gradle-plugins directory we create the info.properties file with the following code:
We are ready to create the artifact with the plugin and upload it to our repository.
We invoke the uploadArchives task, and we get the following output:
To use the plugin, we must create a new Gradle project.
We must extend the classpath of this new project, and include the plugin as a dependency.
We use the buildscript{} script block, where we can configure the repository location and a classpath dependency.
In the dependencies section we set the classpath configuration to the InfoPlugin artifact.
Our project now has the info task from the plugin.
We can configure the plugin extension through the info object or the configuration closure.
If we run the info task, we get the following output:
Summary In this chapter we have learned how to create our own enhanced task.
We have seen how to add the class definition in our build file and use it directly in the build.
If we put the task definition in the buildSrc directory of a Gradle project or multi-project build, we can re-use the task in the context of the Gradle build.
Also, we now have a good separation of the definition and configuration of the task.
Finally, we have learned how to publish the task as an artifact to a repository.
Other projects can include the task in their classpath by using the buildscript{} script block.
Then, we can configure and use the task in the project.
In this chapter we also learned how to write our own Gradle plugin.
We have seen how to add a plugin class to our Gradle build file.
Then we learned to use the buildSrc directory and place the source code of the plugin in there.
Finally, to make the plugin really reusable by other projects, we put the plugin code in a separate project.
The plugin code is then packaged into a JAR file and published to a repository.
Other projects can then define a dependency on the plugin and use the build logic from the plugin.
In the next chapter we see how we can use Gradle in continuous integration tools.
It is good practice to have a continuous integration tool in a software project.
With a continuous integration tool, we can automatically build our software in a controlled environment.
In this chapter, we are going to take a look at the support for Gradle in several continuous integration tools.
First, we are going to create a sample Java project and use Git as a version control repository.
Then, we are going to see how the continuous integration servers Jenkins, JetBrains TeamCity, and Atlassian Bamboo support Gradle.
Creating a sample project Before we can see the support for Gradle in the several continuous integration servers, we must have a sample project.
We are going to create a very simple Java project with a test class and add it to a Git repository, in this section.
We are going to re-use the code in this chapter for our sample project.
We want to have a test in our project, so that we can see how the continuous integration tools can handle test results.
Finally, we want to have more than one artifact for our project; we want to have a JAR file with the compiled classes, source code, and Javadoc generated documentation.
We first create a build.gradle file in a directory, with the following contents:
We create a Java project so we need the Java plugin apply plugin: 'java'
We have a single dependency on JUnit // for the testCompile configuration testCompile 'junit:junit:[4.8,)'
Extra task to create a JAR file with the sources.
Extra task to create a JAR file with Javadoc // generated documentation.
Add extra JAR file to the list of artifacts // for this project.
Next, we create three Java source files in the src/main/java/gradle/sample directory.
First, we have an interface with a single method to return a welcome message:
Next, we create an implementation of this interface and return a String value:
Finally, we have a Java application class that uses the interface and implementation class we already added:
Let's create a test to verify that our ReadWelcomeMessageImpl class returns the expected String value.
To check if everything is okay, we run Gradle with the build task.
We have all the source code, so let's put it in a version control repository.
We can use any version control system we want, as long as the continuous integration server supports the version control system.
We create a Git repository for our example, because it is easy to set up a local repository and then to use it in the continuous integration tools.
In order to use Git, we must have it installed on our computers.
We create a new Git repository in the current project directory, with the init command in Git:
Next, we add the file to the Git staging area, with the add command:
We commit the code to the repository, with the commit command in Git:
Our project is ready to be used in the continuous integration tools.
Using Jenkins One of the most popular open source continuous integration tools is Jenkins.
The good news is that Jenkins has support for Gradle via the Gradle plugin.
Let's see how we can use the plugin to add our little Java project to Jenkins.
To install Jenkins on our computer, we must first download the installation files from the Jenkins website.
We simply run the installer software to install Jenkins on our computer.
We can also download a WAR file and deploy it to a Java web container to install Jenkins.
This means that we can simply run the WAR file with the java -jar command to execute Jenkins.
Adding the Gradle plugin First, we must install the Gradle plugin in Jenkins.
We launch a web browser and access the URL http://localhost:8080
From the Jenkins main page, we select the link Manage Jenkins, which takes us to the appropriate page:
On the Plugin Manager page, we can use the Filter box at the top-right corner to search for Gradle Plugin:
We select the plugin and click on the button Install without restart.
If the installation of the plugin is successful, we see the following screen:
We need to restart Jenkins to make the plugin active and usable for our Jenkins projects.
Configuring Jenkins job Jenkins is now set up with the Gradle plugin, and it is time to create a job.
From the main page, we select the New job link.
We get a screen where we can fill in a name for the job and select the Build a free-style software project radio button:
If we have filled in the name and selected the radio button, we can click on the OK button.
The name of the job is already filled with the value from the previous screen:
We must at least define our Git repository in the Source Code Management section.
Also, we must add a build step in the Build section.
We select the Git radio button to define the location of our Git repository in the URL of repository field.
If we select the button Add build step, in the Build section, we can see the option Invoke Gradle script.
Thanks to the Gradle plugin, we now have this option highlighted in the following screenshot:
We select the option Invoke Gradle script, and Jenkins adds new fields to configure our Gradle build:
First, we can choose if we want to use the Gradle wrapper for this project.
We don't need it for our project, so we leave this unchecked.
We can install multiple Gradle versions for Jenkins, and we can choose which version we want to use.
The default version is the one that is available on the system path.
We will learn later how we can add more Gradle versions to Jenkins.
We can give our build step a short description in the Build step description field.
The Switches field can contain the Gradle command-line options we want to use.
For example, to exclude a task, we can set the value -x taskName.
The Tasks field must contain the tasks we want to execute.
If our project has default tasks set and we want to run those, we can leave the Tasks field empty.
For our project, we want to invoke the clean and build tasks, so we set the value to clean build.
The Root Build script field is for a multi-project build where the root script is not in a default location.
If a Gradle project has a build file name other than the default build.gradle, we can set the value in the Build File field.
Running the job We have the basic setup for running our Gradle project.
We click on the Save button and close the configuration.
At the left, we see a menu with the link Build now.
We click on the link, and Jenkins starts the job:
Our code will be checked out from the Git repository, and the Gradle tasks clean and build are run.
If the job is done, we can see the build result.
From the build result page, we can see the console output when we click on the Console Output link:
At the left, we even see all Gradle tasks that have been executed.
We can click on the links and jump directly to any output of the task.
Configuring artifacts and test results To see the generated artifacts and test results, we must add two post-build actions to the job configuration.
At the Post-build Actions section, we click on the Add post-build action button.
The artifacts are saved in the build/libs directory of our project.
So, in the Files to archive field, we enter build/libs/*.jar.
And, we set the value for the field Test report XMLs to build/test-results/*.xml:
The configuration is done, so we click on the Save button.
We can run the job again, and this time, we see the artifacts of our projects as downloadable links on the job page.
The test results are also shown, and we can even see more details if we click on the Test Result link:
The page has a Gradle section, where we can add new Gradle installations:
If we click on the Add Gradle button, we can define a name for our Gradle installation in the Gradle name field.
If this is checked, Jenkins will download a Gradle version for us from the Internet.
If we want to use a locally installed instance of Gradle, we must uncheck the Install automatically checkbox.
Now, we can set the Gradle location in the GRADLE_HOME field:
We must click on the Save button to save the changes.
Now, we can choose the correct Gradle version in the jobs.
This means that we can create 20 build configurations and one build agent.
If we need more configurations or build agents, we can purchase other licenses.
In this section, we will see how we can create a build plan with Gradle.
We run the installer software to install TeamCity on our computer.
TeamCity is also available as an archive for all platforms.
To install the archive, we only have to unpack the contents to a directory on our computer.
TeamCity is also available as a WAR file, which can be deployed to a Java web container.
Creating a project After we install TeamCity, we open a web browser and go to the URL http:// localhost:8011/
We can create a new project from the Administration page.
We can define the name of our project and provide a short description:
We click on the Create button to create the project and go to an overview page of our project:
We click on the Create build configuration button in the Build Configurations section to add a build configuration.
On the following screen, we can define the path of the artifacts in our project in the Artifact paths field.
We must click on the VCS settings button to go to the next page and define our Git repository as version controller repository.
Here, we must set the Fetch URL field with the location of the Git repository:
We save the configuration and return to an overview page with the VCS:
On this screen, we click on the Add Build Step button.
We are taken to a new screen, where we can select the Runner type of the build.
Here, we select the Gradle runner and click on the Save button:
We are on the configuration page for the build step:
We can fill in a descriptive name for this build step in the Step name field.
In the Gradle Parameters section, we can set the tasks in the Gradle tasks field.
For our project, we want to invoke the clean and build tasks, so we fill in clean build.
Note that we can enable Incremental building for multi-project builds.
To set the Gradle version, we fill in the Gradle home path field.
Extra command-line parameters can be filled in the Additional Gradle command line parameters field.
If our project has a Gradle wrapper, we can check the checkbox Gradle Wrapper.
TeamCity will then use the gradlew or gradlew.bat scripts, instead of the Gradle home path location, to run Gradle.
Running the project We can save the build configuration, and we are ready to run it.
At the top right, we can see the Run button with an ellipsis.
When we click on the ellipsis, we get a dialog window with options that we can set before we run the build:
We leave all options unchanged and click on the Run Build button.
TeamCity instructs the build agent to run our build configuration.
The code is checked out from the repository, and the Gradle tasks clean and build are invoked.
On the Projects page, we see a summary of the build:
We can click on the project and see more details.
The overview page of the project shows the date of the project build, the build agent used, and a summary of test results:
If we click on the Tests tab, we see the tests that have run and the time it took to execute them:
The Build Log tab page shows the output of the build process.
Because we selected the debug level on the build configuration page, we see very detailed information here:
Finally, on the Artifacts page, we see the generated JAR files.
We can click on the filename and see the contents of the files:
Using Atlassian Bamboo The last continuous integration tool we are going to configure is Atlassian Bamboo.
There is a 30-day evaluation license available from the Atlassian website.
We will see how we can configure Bamboo to use Gradle as a build tool for our Java project.
We first need to download the installation package from the Bamboo website.
Alternatively, we can simply download a download a WAR file and deploy it to a web container.
Defining a build plan Bamboo has no Gradle runner or plugin, but we can define a build plan and add a so-called script task.
A script task can run any script as part of the build plan.
To make sure Bamboo can build our Java project, we must add the Gradle wrapper scripts to the project.
We change our build.gradle file and add the task createWrapper:
We create a Java project so we need the Java plugin apply plugin: 'java'
We have a single dependency on JUnit // for the testCompile configuration testCompile 'junit:junit:[4.8,)'
Extra task to create a JAR file with the sources.
Extra task to create a JAR file with Javadoc // generated documentation.
Add extra JAR file to the list of artifacts // for this project.
Also, the directory gradle is created with the configuration for the Gradle wrapper.
We add the directory and files to our Git repository:
We are ready to create a new build plan in Bamboo.
We start a web browser and open the URL http://localhost:8085/
After we have logged in to Bamboo, we select the Create Plan link.
A new page is opened, where we can choose to create a new plan or Maven project:
We go to a new page, where we can set the properties of the build plan:
We must define a project name in the Project Name field.
Bamboo also expects a short identifier in uppercase characters, as the project key, in the Project Key field.
The plan that is part of the project also has a name and key; we fill these the Plan Name and Plan Key fields.
We can set a short description in the Plan Description field.
In the Source Repositories section, we can define the Git repository location for our project.
Finally, in the Build Strategy section, we set the value of the Build Strategy drop-down box to Manual.
This means we manually start the build via the run action in the Bamboo user interface.
We click on the Configure Tasks button to add tasks to our plan.
A task contains some logic we want to execute as part of the plan.
The first task is automatically added and is responsible for checking out the source code of the Git repository.
We click on the Add Task button to create a new task.
A dialog window is shown, and we select the Script task from the Builder section.
With this task, we can configure the Gradle wrapper scripts to be executed.
We return to the tasks window, and we can fill in the fields under Script Configuration:
We fill in a description in the Task Description field.
Script location must be set to File instead of Inline.
The Script file field has the location of the gradlew or gradlew.bat script we want invoked.
In the Argument field, we pass the arguments to the gradlew script.
We want to invoke the clean and build tasks, so we set the value to clean build.
We are ready to click on the Save button to save our script task configuration.
Next, we click on the Create button to finish the configuration and save the plan in Bamboo.
Running the build plan We are ready to run the build and click on the Run button at the top right of the page.
While the build is running, we can see some of the log output.
At the end of the log output, we can see that the gradle-1.1-bin.zip file is downloaded because of the Gradle wrapper script:
After the build is finished, we can see the results.
We also want to add the project artifacts to our plan, and the test results as well.
Therefore, we select the option Configure plan from the Actions menu:
We go to the Artifacts tab page and click on the Create Definition button to add a new artifact definition:
We see a dialog window, and we can define the name, location, and pattern of the artifacts:
We fill in artifacts in the Name field and build/libs in the Location field.
The Copy Pattern field is filled with the value *.jar, to include all JAR files.
We click on the Create button to finish the configuration of the artifacts.
Next, we select the Tasks tab page and click on the Add Task button to create a new task:
In the dialog window with task types, we select JUnit Parser from the Tests section.
We set the Task Description with the value Test results.
In the field Specify custom results directories, we set the pattern build/test-results/*.xml.
We are ready to run our plan again, but this time we have test results:
We click on the Artifacts tab and see that the plan has produced artifacts:
If we click on the artifacts link, we are taken to a page where we can download each artifact JAR file:
Summary In this chapter, we have learned how we must configure continuous integration tools Jenkins, JetBrains TeamCity, and Atlassian Bamboo to build our Java project with Gradle.
We can choose to use either a locally installed Gradle version or the Gradle task wrapper scripts.
We can use the script build option and the Gradle task wrapper support to work around this.
This way, we can still run Gradle builds with Bamboo.
In the next chapter, we will learn how we can integrate Gradle with Integrated Development Environments (IDEs) Eclipse and JetBrains IntelliJ.
An IDE provides support for writing code for our applications.
We can write our code in Java, Groovy, or Scala.
We have seen how we can use Gradle to define, for example, library dependencies to compile the code.
We want to use the same information that we have defined in a Gradle build file in a project in our favorite IDE.
In this chapter, we will learn how we can use Gradle plugins to generate the project files with classpath dependencies for Eclipse and JetBrains IntelliJ IDEA.
We will also learn how we can customize the file generation to add extra configuration data.
Next, we will see the Eclipse and IntelliJ IDEA support for running Gradle tasks from within the IDE.
Using the Eclipse plugin The Eclipse plugin can generate the project files necessary to import the project in Eclipse.
In this section, we will see which tasks are added by the plugin and how we can customize the generated output.
If we have a Java project and want to import the project into Eclipse, we must use the Eclipse plugin to generate the Eclipse project files.
Each Eclipse project has as minimum a .project file and a .classpath file.
The .project file contains metadata about the project, such as the project name.
Eclipse needs this to be able to compile the source files in the project.
The Eclipse plugin will try to download the artifact with source files belonging to a dependency as well.
So, if we import the project into Eclipse and the source files are available, we can directly see the source of dependent class files.
For a Java project, an additional Java Development Tools (JDT) configuration file is created in the .settings folder.
Let's create a simple Gradle build file for a Java project.
The code for the build file is shown in the following code snippet:
We apply the Java and Eclipse plugins for our project.
We set some project properties, such as version, description, source, and target compatibility.
We define a dependency on JUnit for the testCompile configuration.
Also, we add an extra custom configuration with a dependency on the slf4j logging library.
First, let's see which tasks are added to our project by the Eclipse plugin.
We invoke the tasks task and look at all the tasks in our plugin, shown in the following code snippet:
The eclipse task is dependent on the following three tasks: eclipseClasspath, eclipseJdt, and eclipseProject.
The eclipseClasspath task generates the .classpath file, eclipseProject generates the .project file, and eclipseJdt generates org.eclipse.jdt.core.prefs.
When we execute the eclipse task from the command line, we get the following output:
Note that the sources of the JUnit library are downloaded.
We now have the .classpath and .project files in our project folder.
The name element is filled with the project's folder name.
We will learn how to change this later in the chapter.
We have applied the Java plugin in our project, and hence the Java nature and build command are added to the project configuration.
If we look at the .classpath file, we can see a classpathentry element with the JUnit dependency, as shown in the following code snippet:
The classpathentry element has a reference to the location in the Gradle cache of the downloaded JUnit library.
We can see that the source and target compatibility we defined in the Gradle build file are used for the properties org.eclipse.jdt.core.compiler.source, org.
We have added the Java plugin to our project and the Eclipse plugin knows this, so the Java nature and builder are added to the generated .project file.
If we use the Groovy and Scala plugins, the Eclipse plugin will add the correct nature and build configurations to the .project file.
Customizing generated files We have several options to customize the configuration in the generated files.
The Eclipse plugin adds a DSL to configure model objects that represent Eclipse configuration objects.
If we use the DSL to configure the objects, these newly configured objects are merged with existing configuration before the file is generated.
We can also hook into the generation process and work directly on the model objects before and after the configuration is merged and the file is generated.
Finally, we can even use a hook to work directly on the XML structure before the configuration file is generated.
The following steps describe the complete configuration file generation lifecycle:
First, the file is read from disk or a default file is used if the file is not available.
The hook accepts the model object for the configuration file as an argument.
The implicit configuration information from the Gradle build file and the configuration defined using the DSL are merged.
The hook accepts the model object for the configuration file as an argument.
Customizing using DSL When the Eclipse plugin generates the files, it will look in the Gradle build file for the necessary information.
For example, if we set the description property of the Project object, the comment section in the .project file is filled with the value of that property:
The Eclipse plugin also adds a configuration script block with the name eclipse.
At the top level we can add path variables that will be used for replacing absolute paths in classpath entries.
Next, we can define the configuration information for the .project file in the project section.
We can, for example, use the name property to change the name of the project in the generated .project file.
It is good to know that Gradle can generate unique project names for a multi-project build.
A unique name is necessary to import the projects into Eclipse.
During the .project file generation, all projects that are part of the multi-project must be known.
So, it is best to run the eclipse or eclipseProject task from the root of the project.
Also, methods for adding project natures and new build commands are available.
To customize the .classpath file generation, we can use the classpath section of the eclipse configuration closure.
We can use the properties plusConfigurations and minusConfigurations to add or remove dependency configurations from the generated .classpath file.
By default, the associated source files for a dependency are downloaded, but we can also set the downloadJavadoc property to true to download the Javadoc associated with the dependency.
The jdt section of the eclipse configuration closure can be used to change the source and target compatibility versions.
By default, the Gradle Java plugin settings are used, but we can overrride it here.
In the following build file, we see an example of all the possible methods and properties we can use with the DSL to customize the generated .project file:
In the following example build file, we see the options to change the.classpath file:
The following example build file shows the configuration options to generate the org.eclipse.jdt.core.prefs file:
Customizing with merge hooks Using the DSL to customize file generation is very elegant.
Remember from the configuration file generation steps that this information is used right after the beforeMerged and before the whenMerged hooks.
These hooks take a model object as an argument that we can use to customize.
We can use the merge hooks if we want to do something that is not possible using the project configuration or DSL.
The merge hooks can be defined in the eclipse configuration closure.
For each file, we can define a configuration closure for the beforeMerged and whenMerged hooks.
Gradle will delegate the configuration closures to the methods of this class.
The beforeMerged hook is useful to overwrite or change existing sections in the configuraton file.
The cleanEclipse task cleans all the sections in a configuration file, and by using the beforeMerged hook we can ourselves define which parts need to be cleaned or overwritten.
The whenMerged hook is the preferred way of changing the model object.
When this hook is invoked, the model object is already configured with all settings from the project configuration and DSL.
Each file is represented by the file property of the eclipse configuration closures.
For example, to add a merge hook to the .project file generation, we define it 353using the eclipse.project.file property.
The following table shows the class that is passed as an argument for the merge hooks closures:
This method has a closure with an argument of type java.util.Properties.
In the following example build file, we use the merged hooks to change the configuration in the .project file:
In the following example build, we use the merged hooks to change the .classpath and org.eclipse.jdt.core.prefs files:
Customizing with XML manipulation We have seen how to customize the configuration file generation with project configuration, DSL, and the merge hooks.
At the lowest level, there is a hook to change the XML structure before it is written to disk.
We define a closure, and the first argument of the closure is of returns the root of the XML as a Groovy node.
In the following example build file, we can see different ways to manipulate the XML structure:
We have seen all the different options to change the configuration files.
Configuration changes, which we would normally make in Eclipse, can now be done programmatically in a Gradle build file.
Merging configuration If a file already exists, Gradle will try to merge extra information with the existing information.
Depending on the section, the information will be amended to existing configuration data or will replace existing configuration data.
This means that if we make changes to our project settings in Eclipse, they will not be overwritten even if we invoke one of the eclipse tasks.
To completely rebuild the project files, we must use the cleanEclipse tasks.
For each project file, there is a corresponding cleanEclipse task.
For example, to rebuild the .project file, we invoke the cleanEclipseProject task before eclipseProject.
Any changes we have made manually are removed, and a new .project file is generated by Gradle, with the settings from our Gradle build file.
We get support for web applications (WAR) and enterprise applications (EAR)
To generate the correct configuration files, we must add another plugin to our Gradle build file.
We add the Eclipse WTP plugin to the project and also the War or Ear plugin.
Let's create a build file and add the War and Eclipse WTP plugins, as follows:
The Eclipse WTP plugin adds several new tasks to our Gradle build.
In the following snippet, we invoke the tasks task to see which tasks are added:
The Eclipse WTP plugin includes the Eclipse plugin as well.
We get all the tasks that we have seen earlier, but new tasks are also added for WTP configuration files.
The task eclipseWtp depends on eclipseWtpComponent and eclipseWtpFacet, to generate the corresponding configuration files.
Note that the eclipse task itself also now depends on eclipseWtp.
For each of these tasks, there is a corresponding clean task.
If we execute the eclipse task, we get the following configuration files: .project, .classpath, and org.eclipse.jdt.core.prefs.
We also get additional configuration files in the .settings folder, with the names org.eclipse.wst.
The contents of the .project file show that the Eclipse WTP plugin added additional natures and build commands, which is shown as follows:
In the .classpath configuration file, an additional container named org.eclipse.
The contents of the org.eclipse.jdt.core.prefs file in the .settings folder are not different from the standard Eclipse plugin.
Here, we find information for the web part of our project.
The last generated file in the .settings folder is org.eclipse.wst.common.
Customizing file generation The Eclipse WTP plugin uses the same configuration options as the standard Eclipse plugin.
The plugin uses project information to set the value in the configuration files.
We can use a DSL to configure the values we want in the generated files.
We can also use the merge hooks and work with model objects to change information.
The XML structure can be changed using the withXml hook with a configuration closure.
To use the DSL, we can add an additional wtp script block to the eclipse script block.
In the wtp script block, we can change the component configuration in a component configuration closure and the facet settings in the facet configuration closure.
In the following example build file, we see some of the options we can set by using the DSL:
Another method to customize file generation is by using the merge hooks.
The beforeMerged and whenMerged hooks accept a configuration closure to set properties on a model object.
In the following table, we see the types of the model object that is passed as argument to the closure:
In the following example build file, we use the merge hooks to customize the configuration:
Finally, we can manipulate the XML with the withXml hook.
The argument is of type XmlProvider, just like the standard plugin.
The following example build file shows how we can manipulate the XML:
Using the IntelliJ IDEA plugin IntelliJ IDEA from JetBrains is another IDE we can use to develop applications.
Gradle has the IDEA plugin to generate the project files for IntelliJ IDEA.
This means we can simply open the project in IntelliJ IDEA.
The dependencies are set correctly so as to compile the project in the IDE.
In this section, we will see how we can generate those files and customize file generation.
IntelliJ IDEA supports a folder-based and file-based format for the project files.
The workspace project file has the extension .iws and contains personal settings.
The project information is stored in a file with extension .ipr.
The project file can be saved in a version control system, because it doesn't have reference to local paths.
The workspace project file has a lot of personal settings and shouldn't be put in a version control system.
For a Java project, we have a third project file with the exension .iml.
We shouldn't put this file in a version control system.
The IDEA plugin can just, like the Eclipse plugin, download associated source files for a dependency.
We can also configure and download the associated Javadoc files.
If we have a Gradle build file and apply both the Java and IDEA plugins, a specific Java configuration is added to the project files.
Let's create an example build file and apply the IDEA plugin, as shown in the following code snippet:
First, we execute the tasks task and see which tasks are added by the plugin, as follows:
We have an idea task that is dependent on the following three other tasks: ideaWorkspace, ideaModule, and ideaProject.
To remove the module and project files, we can execute the cleanIdeaModule and cleanIdeaProject tasks or simply the cleanIdea task.
There is no cleanIdeaWorkspace task, because the workspace file contains personal settings.
These settings are probably set via the user interface of IntelliJ IDEA and shouldn't be removed by a Gradle task.
When we run the idea task from the command line and look at the output which is as follows, we see that all the tasks are executed and we now have three project files:
Customizing file generation The IDEA plugin has several ways to customize the configuration in the generated files.
The plugin will look in the project settings and use the information in the generated files.
For example, we can set the source and target compatibility versions in our Gradle project and the plugin will use them to set a correct value in the generated project file.
We can use a DSL to change the configuration information before the file is generated.
Gradle also offers hooks where we can manipulate model objects before and after the project information and DSL configuration is applied.
To change the generated XML structure, we can implement the withXml hook.
We can alter the XML just before it is written to disk.
To change the contents of the workspace file, we should use the withXml hook.
The workspace file has an empty model object and has no DSL, because the contents are very specific and they contain a lot of personal settings.
Customizing using DSL The IDEA plugin adds a new idea configuration script block that is used to change the project files' contents.
For the module and project files, we can use a DSL to set the configuration settings.
For module file generation, we can change the name of the file.
Gradle will make sure the file names are unique within a multi-project build.
IntelliJ IDEA requires that the module names be unique for a multi-module project.
We can customize which dependency configuration apply to which scope.
The following table shows the default mapping of IntelliJ IDEA scopes with Gradle dependency configurations:
We can add additional configurations using the plus key and remove configurations with the minus key.
In the following example build file, we see the different options and methods of the DSL used to change the project file contents:
Default is from Java version // used to run Gradle.
The following example build file shows some of the options we can use to change the module file:
Set specific JDK for this module, or use the value 'inherited' // to use project JDK.
Customizing with merged hooks With the merge hooks, we can access the model objects and manipulate them to customize file generation.
In the following table, we can see the type of argument that is passed to the beforeMerged and whenMerged hooks:
The project script block has an ipr script block that we must use to define the beforeMerged and whenMerged hooks.
The module script block has the iml configuration script block to define those hooks.
In the following example build file, we see some of the things we can do by using the merge hooks:
Customizing with XML manipulation At the lowest level, we can manipulate the XML before it is written to disk.
For workspace file configuration changes, this is the best way.
We can also use it for the project and module files.
We must implement a closure with the withXml hook to customize the XML structure.
In the following example build file, we make some changes to the XML for the project, module, and workspace files:
Running Gradle in Eclipse We can generate the Eclipse project files using the Eclipse plugin.
In this section, we see how to install the Gradle plugin in Eclipse and also how we can use it to import a Gradle build file and execute tasks.
SpringSource Tool Suite is based on Eclipse and adds support for building Spring-based applications through already-installed plugins.
If we want to re-use our existing Eclipse IDE, we can install STS as a plugin.
The plugin has an import wizard to import existing Gradle builds.
The plugin keeps track of dependencies defined in the Gradle build file as project dependencies.
This means that if we change a dependency in the build file, the Eclipse classpath will be updated with the change, so that the compiler can use it.
To execute tasks, the plugin adds an additional view to Eclipse.
If we have installed the Groovy Eclipse plugin, we get Gradle DSL support.
This means we get code completion and Javadoc tooltips in the editor when we edit Gradle build files.
Installing Gradle plugin To install the Gradle plugin, we use the update site, http://dist.springsource.
From the Help menu, we select Install New Software...., we then see a new dialog window.
In the dialog window that appears, we fill in the correct values shown in the following screenshot:
We click on the Select All button and continue, as shown in the following screenshot:
We have to accept the licenses, and Eclipse downloads the plugin components.
Restart Eclipse after all the plugin components have been downloaded.
If we want DSL support for the Gradle build files, we must also install the Groovy Eclipse plugin.
We go to SpringSource Dashboard and select the Extension tab.
In the Find: field, we type in groovy-eclipse and select the Groovy-Eclipse option from the search results, as shown in the following screenshot:
We click on the Install button to install the plugin into Eclipse.
Importing Gradle project After we have installed the plugin, we can use the import wizard to import a Gradle project.
We use a very simple Java project with the following build file:
In the Import dialog window, we type gradle in the search field.
We select the Gradle Project option before we click on the Next button, as shown in the following screenshot:
In the next step of the import wizard, we must specify the root folder for our Gradle project.
For a multi-project build, we should select the root folder.
If we only have a single project, we can then select the project folder.
After we have selected the folder, we must click on the Build Model button.
The folder is then scanned for information, and after the model is built, we can see our project displayed as shown in the following screenshot:
We can select the project and click on the Finish button to import the project into our Eclipse workspace.
But before we do that, first take a closer look at the Import options.
The option Run before allows us to define Gradle tasks to be executed before the import.
The default value cleanEclipse eclipse will regenerate the Eclipse project files from the Eclipse plugin in our Gradle build file.
We don't need it for Java projects, because the Gradle plugin in Eclipse will make sure everything works.
For web or enterprise applications with WTP support, we can still invoke the eclipse tasks.
This task name is a hook for the import process.
We must implement the task ourselves in the build file, if we want to do some customization after the import wizard is finished.
With the Enable dependency management option, we instruct Eclipse to build the dependencies based on the Gradle build file contents.
The Enable DSL Support is useful if we have also installed the Groovy-Eclipse plugin.
The Create resource filters option can be used for multi-project builds.
The Gradle plugin will create linked projects to be able to import multiple projects, but this means a project can occur multiple times in the project view.
If we enable this option, a resource filter is created, so that we see the project displayed only once in the project view.
Also, with multi-project build, the option Use hierarchical project names can be used.
If we enable this option, the name of the root project is also used in the project name.
Finally, if we enable the option Create workingset 'eclipse', a new working set is created with all the projects that we import.
We don't want to execute any Gradle tasks before and after the import, so we must uncheck those options.
After unchecking the Run before and Run after options, we are now ready to click on the Finish button, as shown in the following screenshot:
After the import wizard is done, we can see our project in the Package Explorer, as shown in the next screenshot:
The Gradle Dependencies node has the dependency that we have defined in our Gradle build file.
If we add new dependencies, we can update the project by right-clicking on the project name.
Running tasks To execute tasks, we first open the Gradle Tasks view.
We type gradle in the search field, to search for the Gradle Tasks view, as shown in following screenshot:
We select the view and click on the OK button.
In our workspace, we now have the Gradle Tasks view.
The tasks for that project are then displayed as shown in the following screenshot:
To execute a task, we simply have to double-click on the task name, and in the Console view, we can see the output of the executed task.
We can also use the launch framework of Eclipse to run tasks.
We must right-click on the project and select the Gradle Build or Gradle Build...
The launch configuration is opened, and here we can configure the tasks to be executed, as shown in following screenshot:
If we have multiple tasks to execute, we can set the order in the Task execution order section.
Editing build files We have installed the Groovy-Eclipse plugin, and if we open the build.gradle file, we get code completion support for the Gradle DSL.
For example, if we type ar and enter the key combination for code completion, we can see the option artifacts, as shown in the following screenshot:
Running Gradle in IntelliJ IDEA We can generate IDEA project files with the IDEA plugin in our build file.
IntelliJ IDEA has a Gradle plugin to import a Gradle project without first creating the project files.
In this section, we learn how to use the Gradle plugin with IntelliJ IDEA 11.1
We use the same project that was used with the Eclipse Gradle plugin to import the project into IntelliJ IDEA.
Installing the plugin The Gradle plugin can be installed through the IntelliJ IDEA plugin manager.
We need to go to IDE Settings in the Settings window, as shown in the following screenshot:
We select the Gradle plugin to install it in the IDE.
Once we have installed the plugin, we can then import a project.
Importing a project To import an existing Gradle project, we start the New project wizard.
IntelliJ IDEA shows a dialog window in which we can choose the source of the new project.
We select the Import project from external model option, as shown in the following screenshot:
We click on the Next button and select Gradle as external model, as shown in the following screenshot:
Now we can click on the Next button, and in the following window, we must fill in the location of the build.gradle file and the location of our Gradle installation as shown in the following screenshot:
After we have filled in the values, we click on the Next button.
IntelliJ IDEA will parse the build file and then show the determined Project structure in the following window.
We can change the properties for the project, module, and content-root properties.
In the following screenshot, we can see the properties that are set for the project property:
Next, we can see the properties that are set for the module property, as shown in the following screenshot:
In the following screenshot, we can see the properties that are set for the content-root property:
We click on the Finish button, and IntelliJ IDEA opens the new project.
We can see the project and its dependencies, as shown in the following screenshot:
To see the Gradle project dependency structure, we can also open the JetGradle window.
Here, we can see the differences between the IDEA module dependencies and the Gradle dependencies.
We must click on the Refresh button to use the latest changes in the build.gradle file.
For example, if we add a new compile dependency org.slf4j:slf4j-api:1.6.4, we must click on the Refresh button to see the changes, as shown in the following screenshot:
This means that the dependency is defined in the Gradle build file, but not in the IntelliJ IDEA module.
We right-click on the dependency and then select Import to add the dependency to the IDEA module, as shown in the following screenshot:
If dependencies were added to the IDEA module, but not defined in the Gradle build file, the color of the dependency will be blue.
A pop-up menu is shown, and from here select the Edit...
In the Script parameters field, we can type the task names that we want to execute, as shown in the following screenshot:
We click on the Run button to execute the tasks.
After the tasks are executed, we can see the output of the tasks in the Run window.
The new configuration is added to the list of configurations.
We can choose the configuration again to re-run the tasks.
Summary When we develop applications, we usually develop the code with an IDE.
In this chapter, we have seen how we can use the Gradle plugins in Eclipse, Eclipse WTP, and IDEA, to generate project files for Eclipse and IntelliJ IDEA.
The plugins have a DSL to change the configuration before the files are generated.
We can also use hooks to change the model objects before and after the DSL is applied.
At the lowest level, we can use the withXml hook to alter the XML content before the file is written to disk.
Both Eclipse and IntelliJ IDEA have plugins to import an existing Gradle project.
We can then work with the project from within the IDE.
Extra dependencies or changes are reflected in the classpath project files, so that the code can be compiled with the IDE's compiler.
We can also run Gradle tasks from within the IDE, so we don't have to leave our favorite IDE if we want to use Gradle.
In this book, we have seen the power of Gradle as a build tool.
If we know the basics, we can accomplish many things.
We learned how to add functionality to a build file, with tasks.
We have seen how we can use Gradle in Java, Groovy, and Scala projects.
We have learned how to create custom tasks and plugins to enable the re-use of build logic across projects.
After reading this book, we will be able to use Gradle in our software development.
By using Gradle, we can have great flexibility in our projects and still rely on sold convention-overconfiguration defaults.
We can start simple and gradually expand the build script with more functionality.
With this book, we should get started quickly and have successful Gradle implementation in our projects.
About Packt Publishing Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks.
Our solution based books give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using to get the job done.
Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have seen in the past.
Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike.
This book is part of the Packt Open Source brand, home to books published on software built around Open Source licences, and offering information to anybody from advanced developers to budding web designers.
The Open Source brand also runs Packt's Open Source Royalty Scheme, by which Packt gives a royalty to each Open Source project about whose software a book is sold.
Writing for Packt We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring.
If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our commissioning editors will get in touch with you.
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some additional reward for your expertise.
Implement engineering practices in your application development process with Apache Maven.
Covers exciting features such as the try-with-resources block, the monitoring of directory events, asynchronous IO and new GUI enhancements, and more.
A learn-by-example based approach that focuses on key concepts to provide the foundation to solve real world problems.
A practical, focused mini book for creating Web Services in Java 7
End-to-end application which makes use of the new clientjar option in JAX-WS wsimport tool.
Packed with comprehensive recipes to secure, tune, and extend your Java EE applications.
Secure your Java applications using Java EE built-in features as well as the well-known Spring Security framework.
Explore various ways to extend a Java EE environment with the use of additional dynamic languages as well as frameworks.
