With the TryStack OpenStack installation, these services work together in the background of the installation.
After you authenticate through the Identity Service, you can use the other OpenStack APIs to create and manage resources in your OpenStack cloud.
You can launch instances from images and assign metadata to instances through the Compute API or the nova commandline client.
To begin sending API requests, use one of the following methods:
A command-line tool that lets you send HTTP requests and receive responses.
Each OpenStack project provides a command-line client that enables you to access its API through easy-to-use commands.
Both Mozilla and Google provide browser-based graphical interfaces for REST.
OpenStack APIs To authenticate access to OpenStack services, you issue an authentication request to the OpenStack Identity Service.
You must supply a payload of credentials in the authentication request.
Credentials are usually a combination of your user name and password, and optionally, the name or ID of the tenant in which your cloud runs.
Ask your cloud administrator for your user name, password, and tenant so that you can generate authentication tokens.
Alternatively, you can supply a token rather than a user name and password.
When you send API requests, you include the token in the X-Auth-Token header.
You must generate another token if you interact with your cloud through API endpoints rather than through a client.
Request an authentication token from the Identity Service endpoint that your cloud administrator gave you.
If you do not provide a user name and password, you must provide a token.
Both the tenantId and tenantName are optional, but should not be specified together.
If both attributes are specified, the server responds with a 400 Bad Request.
Both the tenantId and tenantName are optional, but should not be specified together.
If both attributes are specified, the server responds with a 400 Bad Request.
If you do not provide a token, you must provide a user name and password.
If the request succeeds, the server returns an authentication token.
Send API requests and include the token in the X-Auth-Token header.
Continue to send API requests with that token until the job completes or a 401 Unauthorized error occurs.
Authenticate For a typical OpenStack deployment that runs the Identity Service, use a cURL command like the following command to request a token:
If you do not know your tenant name or ID, you can send an authentication request with an empty tenant, as follows:
OpenStack command-line clients For scripting work, you can use a command-line client like the python-novaclient client.
This client enables you to use the Compute API through a command-line interface.
Install the clients Use pip to install the OpenStack clients on a Mac OS X or Linux system.
It is easy and ensures that you get the latest version of the client from the Python Package Index.
After you install the clients, you must source an openrc file to set required environment variables before you can request OpenStack services through the clients or the APIs.
For example, to install the nova client, run the following command: $ sudo pip install python-novaclient.
To update the nova client, run the following command: $ sudo pip install --upgrade python-novaclient.
To remove the nova client, run the following command: $ sudo pip uninstall python-novaclient.
Before you can issue client commands, you must download and source the openrc file to set environment variables.
Launch an instance To launch instances, you must choose a name, an image, and a flavor for your instance.
To list available images, call the Compute API through the nova client, as follows: $ nova image-list.
To list flavors, run the following command: $ nova flavor-list.
To launch an instance, note the IDs of your desired image and flavor.
Use the nova list command to view your server: $ nova list.
To view details for a specified server, use the nova show command.
