Scaling MongoDB, the image of a trigger fish, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks.
Where those designations appear in this book, and O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher and authors assume no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of the information contained herein.
This text is for MongoDB users who are interested in sharding.
It is a comprehensive look at how to set up and use a cluster.
This is not an introduction to MongoDB; I assume that you understand what a document, collection, and database are, how to read and write data, what an index is, and how and why to set up a replica set.
If you are not familiar with MongoDB, it’s easy to learn.
There are a number of books on MongoDB, including MongoDB: The Definitive Guide from this author.
Conventions Used in This Book The following typographical conventions are used in this book: Italic.
Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, and file extensions.
Used for program listings, as well as within paragraphs to refer to program elements such as variable or function names, databases, data types, environment variables, statements, and keywords.
Constant width bold Shows commands or other text that should be typed literally by the user.
Constant width italic Shows text that should be replaced with user-supplied values or by values determined by context.
Using Code Examples This book is here to help you get your job done.
In general, you may use the code in this book in your programs and documentation.
You do not need to contact us for permission unless you’re reproducing a significant portion of the code.
For example, writing a program that uses several chunks of code from this book does not require permission.
Selling or distributing a CD-ROM of examples from O’Reilly books does require permission.
Answering a question by citing this book and quoting example code does not require permission.
Incorporating a significant amount of example code from this book into your product’s documentation does require permission.
An attribution usually includes the title, author, publisher, and ISBN.
With a subscription, you can read any page and watch any video from our library online.
Access new titles before they are available for print, and get exclusive access to manuscripts in development and post feedback for the authors.
Copy and paste code samples, organize your favorites, download chapters, bookmark key sections, create notes, print out pages, and benefit from tons of other time-saving features.
To have full digital access to this book and others on similar topics from O’Reilly and other publishers, sign up for free at http://my.safaribooksonline.com.
How to Contact Us Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:
We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any additional information.
Find us on Facebook: http://facebook.com/oreilly Follow us on Twitter: http://twitter.com/oreillymedia Watch us on YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/oreillymedia.
In the Terminator movies, an artificial intelligence called Skynet wages war on humans, chugging along for decades creating robots and killing off humanity.
This is the dream of most ops people—not to destroy humanity, but to build a distributed system that will work long-term without relying on people carrying pagers.
Skynet is still a pipe dream, unfortunately, because distributed systems are very difficult, both to design well and to keep running.
A single database server has a couple of basic states: it’s either up or down.
If you add another machine and divide your data between the two, you now have some sort of dependency between the servers.
However, if you want to store a large volume of data or access it at a rate higher than a single server can handle, you’ll need to set up a cluster.
On the plus side, MongoDB tries to take care of a lot of the issues listed above.
Keep in mind that this isn’t as simple as setting up a single mongod (then again, what is?)
This book shows you how to set up a robust cluster and what to expect every step of the way.
What Is Sharding? Sharding is the method MongoDB uses to split a large collection across several servers (called a cluster)
While sharding has roots in relational database partitioning, it is (like most aspects of MongoDB) very different.
The biggest difference between any partitioning schemes you’ve probably used and MongoDB is that MongoDB does almost everything automatically.
Once you tell MongoDB to distribute data, it will take care of keeping your data balanced between servers.
You have to tell MongoDB to add new servers to the cluster, but once you do, MongoDB takes care of making sure that they get an even amount of the data, too.
Sharding is designed to fulfill three simple goals: Make the cluster “invisible.”
We want an application to have no idea that what it’s talking to is anything other than a single, vanilla mongod.
To accomplish this, MongoDB comes with a special routing process called mongos.
It forwards requests to the correct server or servers in the cluster, then assembles their responses and sends them back to the client.
This makes it so that, in general, a client does not need to know that they’re talking to a cluster rather than a single server.
There are a couple of exceptions to this abstraction when the nature of a cluster forces it.
A cluster can’t guarantee it’ll always be available (what if the power goes out everywhere?), but within reasonable parameters, there should never be a time when users can’t read or write data.
The cluster should allow as many nodes as possible to fail before its functionality noticeably degrades.
There is also the question of what to do when data is being migrated from one machine to another, which is actually a very interesting and difficult problem: how do you provide continuous and consistent access to data while it’s in transit? We’ve come up with some clever solutions to this, but it’s a bit beyond the scope of this book.
However, under the covers, MongoDB is doing some pretty nifty tricks.
Let the cluster grow easily As your system needs more space or resources, you should be able to add them.
MongoDB allows you to add as much capacity as you need as you need it.
Adding (and removing) capacity is covered further in Chapter 3
These goals have some consequences: a cluster should be easy to use (as easy to use as a single node) and easy to administrate (otherwise adding a new shard would not be easy)
To set up, administrate, or debug a cluster, you have to understand the basic scheme of how sharding works.
This chapter covers the basics so that you can reason about what’s going on.
Splitting Up Data A shard is one or more servers in a cluster that are responsible for some subset of the data.
If there is more than one server in a shard, each server has an identical copy of the subset of data (Figure 2-1)
In production, a shard will usually be a replica set.
If a shard contains more than one server, each server has a complete copy of the data.
To evenly distribute data across shards, MongoDB moves subsets of the data from shard to shard.
It figures out which subsets to move based on a key that you choose.
For example, we might choose to split up a collection of users based on the username field.
Throughout this text, I’ll use standard range notation to describe ranges.
Thus, the four possible ranges are: x is in (a, b)
This is a nice, easy-to-understand system for sharding, but it becomes inconvenient in a large or busy system.
It’s easiest to see why by working through what would happen.
That’s a lot of extra data moved considering that all movement has to cascade across the cluster.
This cascade situation just gets worse and worse as the number of shards and amount of data grows.
This time, we’ll allow each shard to contain multiple chunk ranges.
When we split a chunk’s range into two ranges, it becomes two chunks.
Allowing multiple, non-consecutive ranges in a shard allows us to pick and choose data and to move it anywhere.
When a new shard is added, everyone can contribute data to it directly.
As a chunk gets bigger, MongoDB will automatically split it into two smaller chunks.
If the shards become unbalanced, chunks will be migrated to correct the imbalance.
How Chunks Are Created When you decide to distribute data, you have to choose a key to use for chunk ranges (we’ve been using username above)
This key is called a shard key and can be any field or combination of fields.
We’ll go over how to choose the shard key and the actual commands to shard a collection in Chapter 3.)
As you can see, all of the documents in this chunk have their age value in the chunk’s range.
If you shard a collection containing a lot of data, MongoDB will immediately split this initial chunk into smaller chunks.
In the first example given, chunks are hundreds of gigabytes in size, but in a real system, chunks are only 200MB by default.
This is because moving data is expensive: it takes a lot of time, uses system resources, and can add a significant amount of network traffic.
You can try it out by inserting 200MB into a collection.
Then imagine doing this on a system with multiple indexes (as your production system will probably have) while other traffic is coming in.
You don’t want your application to grind to a halt while MongoDB shuffles data in the background; in fact, if a chunk gets too big, MongoDB will refuse to move it at all.
You don’t want chunks to be too small, either, because each chunk has a little bit of administrative overhead to requests (so you don’t want to have to keep track of zillions of them)
It turns out that 200MB is the sweet spot between portability and minimal overhead.
A chunk is a logical concept, not a physical reality.
The documents in a chunk are not physically contiguous on disk or grouped in any way.
A document belongs in a chunk if and only if its shard key value is in that chunk’s range.
Balancing If there are multiple shards available, MongoDB will start migrating data to other shards once you have a sufficient number of chunks.
This migration is called balancing and is performed by a process called the balancer.
The nice thing about the balancer is that it’s automatic—you don’t have to worry about keeping your data even across shards because it’s done for you.
This is also the downside: it’s automatic, so if you don’t like the way it’s balancing things, tough luck.
Your only options are to either re-shard the collection or turn off balancing.
As of this writing, the balancer’s algorithm isn’t terribly intelligent.
It moves chunks based on the overall size of the shard and calls it a day.
The goal of the balancer is not only to keep the data evenly distributed but also to minimize the amount of data transferred.
For a balancing round to occur, a shard must have at least nine more chunks than the least-populous shard.
At that point, chunks will be migrated off of the crowded shard until it is even with the rest of the shards.
The reason the balancer isn’t very aggressive is that MongoDB wants to avoid sending the same data back and forth.
By waiting for a more severe imbalance, MongoDB can minimize pointless data transfers.
If every slight imbalance is corrected, a lot of data will end up moving unnecessarily.
The Psychopathology of Everyday Balancing Most users want to prove to themselves that sharding works by watching their data move, which creates a problem: the amount of data it takes to trigger a balancing round is larger than most people realize.
Let’s say I’m just playing with sharding, so I write a shell script to insert half a million documents into a sharded collection.
After half a million documents, I should see some data flying around, right? Wrong.
If I take a look at the database stats, I still have a ways to go (some fields have been omitted for clarity):
When people start sharding, they want to see their data moving around.
However, in a production system, you don’t want a lot of migration because it’s a very expensive operation.
So, on the one hand, we have the very human desire to see migrations actually happen.
On the other hand, we have the fact that sharding won’t work very well if it isn’t irritatingly slow to human eyes.
What MongoDB did was implement two “tricks” to make sharding more satisfying for users, but not destructive to production systems.
When you start up your first mongos, you can specify --chunkSize N, where N is the chunk size that you want in megabytes.
If you’re just trying out sharding and messing around, you can set --chunkSize 1 and see your data migrating after a couple of megabytes of inserts.
Once you have a bunch of chunks, it ramps the chunk size back up to 200MB automatically.
Chunk size can be changed by starting with --chunkSize N or modifying the config.settings collection and restarting everything.
However, unless you’re trying out the 1MB chunk size for fun, don’t mess with the chunk size.
I guarantee that, whatever you’re trying to fix, fiddling with chunk size is not going to solve the root problem.
Leave chunk size alone unless you want to play around with --chunkSize 1
Routing a request to a shard with the corresponding chunk.
The Config Servers mongos processes don’t actually store any data persistently, so the configuration of a cluster is held on special mongods called config servers.
Config servers hold the definitive information about the cluster for everyone’s access (shards, mongos processes, and system administrators)
For a chunk migration to succeed, all of the configuration servers have to be up.
If one of them goes down, all currently occurring migrations will revert themselves and stop until you get a full set of config servers up again.
If any config servers go down, your cluster’s configuration cannot change.
Config servers, for all their importance, are pretty lightweight and can basically be run on any machine available.
Each shard usually consists of multiple machines, as that’s where the data actually lives.
Choosing a Shard Key Choosing a good shard key is absolutely critical.
If you choose a bad shard key, it can break your application immediately or when you have heavy traffic, or it can lurk in wait and break your application at a random time.
On the other hand, if you choose a good shard key, MongoDB will just do the right thing as you get more traffic and add more servers, for as long as your application is up.
As you learned in the last chapter, a shard key determines how your data will be distributed across your cluster.
Thus, you want a shard key that distributes reads and writes, but that also keeps the data you’re using together.
These can seem like contradictory goals, but it can often be accomplished.
First we’ll go over a couple of bad shard key choices and find out why they’re bad, then we’ll come up with a couple of better ones.
There is also a good page on the MongoDB wiki on choosing a shard key.
This is fine for a while, but what happens when you start running out of space on your servers? There’s nothing you can do, aside from getting a bigger hard disk.
This choice of shard key is called a low-cardinality shard key, because there are a limited number of shard key values.
If you choose a shard key with low cardinality, you will end up with large, unmovable, unsplittable chunks that will make your life miserable.
If you are doing this because you want to manually distribute your data, do not use MongoDB’s built-in sharding.
However, you can certainly manually shard your collections, write your own router, and route reads and writes to whichever server(s) you’d like.
It’s just easier to choose a good shard key and let MongoDB do it for you.
This rule applies to any key that has a finite number of values.
Keep in mind that, if a key has N values in a collection, you can only have N chunks and, therefore, N shards.
If you are tempted to use low-cardinality shard key because you query on that field a lot, use a compound shard key (a shard key with two fields) and make sure that the second field has lots of different values MongoDB can use for splitting.
If a collection has a lifetime (e.g., you’re creating a new collection each week and you know that, in a single week, you won’t get near the capacity of any of your shards), you could choose this as a key.
This example is not just about choosing a low-cardinality shard key, but also about trying to hack data-center awareness into MongoDB’s sharding.
If you’re interested in this, you can watch/vote for the relevant bug.
The problem with hacking it together yourself is that it isn’t very extensible.
What happens if your application is big in Japan? Now you want to add a second shard to handle Asia.
How are you going to migrate data over? You can’t move a chunk once it’s more than a few gigabytes in size, and you can’t split the chunk because there is only one shard key value in the whole chunk.
You can’t just update all of the documents to use a more unique value because you can’t update a shard key value.
You could remove each document, change the shard key’s value, and resave it, but that is not a swift operation for a large database.
Also, once you start having finer-grained chunks, there’s no guarantee MongoDB will put them where you want (unless you turn off the balancer and do everything manually)
Data-center awareness is very important for large applications and it’s a high priority for MongoDB developers.
Choosing a low-cardinality shard key is not a good solution for the interim.
This rule applies to anything ascending; it doesn’t have to be a timestamp.
This includes ObjectIds, dates, auto-incrementing primary keys (imported from other databases, possibly)
If the key’s values trend towards infinity, you will have this problem.
Basically, this shard key is always a bad idea because it guarantees you’ll have a hotspot.
If you have low traffic so that a single shard can handle almost all reads and writes, this could work.
Of course, if you get a traffic spike or become more popular, it would stop working and be difficult to fix.
Don’t use an ascending shard key unless you’re sure you know what you’re doing.
Random Shard Key Sometimes, in an effort to avoid a hotspot, people choose a field with random values to shard by.
This will work fine at first, but as you get more data, it can become slower and slower.
Let’s say we’re storing thumbnail photos in a sharded collection.
Each document contains the binary data for the photo, an MD5 hash of the binary data, a description, the date it was taken, and who took it.
As our collection grows, we end up with a pretty even number of chunks evenly distributed across our shards.
Now, let’s say we’re pretty busy and a chunk on Shard 2 fills up and splits.
MongoDB now has to load a random five chunks’ worth of data into memory and send it to Shard 1
This is data that wouldn’t have been in memory ordinarily, because it’s a completely random order of data.
So, now MongoDB is going to be putting a lot more pressure on RAM and there’s going to be a lot of disk IO going on (which is always slow)
You must have an index on the key you shard by, so if you choose a randomly-valued key that you don’t query by, you’re basically “wasting” an index.
Every additional index makes writes slower, so it’s important to keep the number of indexes as low as possible.
Good Shard Keys What we really want is something that takes into account our access patterns.
So, we want to choose a shard key with nice data locality, but not so local that we end up with a hot spot.
If it is, the shard key will degenerate into an ascending key and you’ll have the same hotspot problems a vanilla ascending key gives you.
So what should search be? Hopefully, the search field can be something useful your application can use for querying, possibly user info (as in the example above), a filename field, a GUID, etc.
It should be a fairly randomly distributed non-ascending key with decent cardinality.
This key is not the only possible shard key and it won’t work well for everything.
However, it’s a good way to start thinking about how to choose a shard key, even if you do not ultimately use it.
Before you choose one, think about the answers to these questions:
Sharding a New or Existing Collection Once you have selected a shard key, you are ready to shard your data.
Quick Start If you’re looking to set up a cluster to play around with as fast as possible, you can set one up in a minute or two using the mongo-snippets repository on Github.
It’s a little lacking in documentation, but this repository is basically a collection of useful scripts for users.
Of particular interest is simple-setup.py, which automatically starts, configures, and populates a cluster (locally)
To run this script, you’ll need to have the MongoDB Python driver.
If you do not have it installed, you can install it (on *NIX systems) by running:
Once Pymongo is installed, download the mongo-snippets repository and run the following command:
If you are interested in setting up a serious-business cluster, read on.
Config Servers You can run either one or three configuration servers.
We’ll be using three config servers, as that’s what you should do whenever you’re in production.
One or three” is a weird and somewhat arbitrary restriction, but the rationale is that one is good for testing, and three is good for production.
Two is more than people would want to test with and not enough for production.
You can’t run an arbitrary number because their interactions are complex, and the programming and logic of what to do if N out of M config servers are down is difficult.
MongoDB probably will support any number of config servers in the future, but it’s not an immediate priority.
Setting up configuration servers is pretty boring because they’re just vanilla mongod instances.
The only important thing to note when setting up config servers is that you want some of them up all of the time, so try to put them in separate failure domains.
Let’s say we have three data centers: one in New York, one in San Francisco, and one on the moon.
That’s it! You might notice a slight problem with this setup.
These servers, which are supposed to be intimately connected to each other, have no idea that the others exist or that they are even config servers.
This is fine—we’re going to hook them up in a moment.
Sometimes, people assume that they have to set up replication on config servers.
Configuration servers do not use the same replication mechanism as “normal” mongod replication and should not be started as replica sets or master-slave setups.
Sharding does not support authentication at the moment, although this should change midway-through 1.9
It’s not a particularly good idea to run it with --quiet because you want to be able to figure out what’s going on if something goes wrong.
Instead of --quiet, use --logpath <file> and --logappend to send the logs somewhere so you’ll have them if you run into problems.
The Sharding options apply to shards, not the configuration servers, so ignore those.
You don’t need to use any of the other options (under Replication, Replica set, or Master/slave) because you didn’t start up your config servers with replication, right?
A sharded setup needs at least one mongos but can have as many as you’d like.
Keep in mind that you will have to (or at least should) monitor all of the mongos processes you spin up, so you probably don’t want thousands, but one mongos per application server usually is a good number.
So, we’ll log on to our application server and start up our first mongos.
Press Enter, and now all the config servers know about each other.
The mongos is like the host of the party that introduces them all to each other.
You can’t actually store any data in it (configuration servers only store configuration, not data), but other than that, it’s totally functional.
As you might want to use your database to read or write data, let’s add some data storage.
Shards All administration on a cluster is done through the mongos.
So, connect your shell to the mongos process you started.
Setting up sharding requires commands to be run from the admin database.
There are two ways to add a shard, depending on whether the shard is a single server or a replica set.
Let’s say we have a single server, sf-02, that we’ve been using for data.
We can make it the first shard by running the addShard command:
MongoDB will give you an error if you attempt to store data before you have any shards to put it on, for obvious reasons.) In general, you should use a replica set, not a single server, for each shard.
That is, you must give the set name and at least one member of the set (mongos can derive the other members as long as it can connect to someone)
Notice that we ended up with a much nicer name this time! (I was the one who programmed it to pick up on the replica set name, so I’m particularly proud of it.) If you add a replica set, its name will become the shard name.
If you don’t want the default, use the name option when you add a shard.
You’ll have to refer to shards by name occasionally (see Chapter 5), so don’t make the name too crazy or long.
This is useful if you’re using a bunch of commodity servers, but you can run into problems if you have one gargantuan machine with 10 terabytes and one ho-hum machine with a few hundred gigabytes.
If your servers are seriously out of balance, you should use the max Size option.
This specifies the maximum size, in megabytes, that you want the shard to grow to.
Keep in mind that maxSize is more of a guideline than a rule.
MongoDB will not cap off a shard at maxSize and not let it grow another byte, but rather it’ll stop moving data to the shard and possibly move some data off.
In the future, MongoDB will automatically figure out how much space it has to work with on each shard and plan accordingly.
In the meantime, use maxSize to give it a hint.
Databases and Collections If you want MongoDB to distribute your data, you have to let it know which databases and collections you want to distribute.
You have to tell MongoDB that a database can contain sharded collections before you try to shard its collections.
Let’s say we’re writing a blog application, so all of our collections live in the blog database.
Note that we include the database name: blog.posts, not posts.
If we are sharding a collection with data in it, the data must have an index on the shard key.
All documents must have a value for the shard key, too (and the value cannot be null)
After you’ve sharded the collection, you can insert documents with a null shard key value.
Adding and Removing Capacity As your application continues to grow, you’ll need to add more shards.
When you add a shard, MongoDB will start moving data from the existing shards to the new one.
Keep in mind that moving data puts added pressure on shards.
MongoDB tries to do this as gently as possible; it slowly moves one chunk at a time, then tries again later if the server seems busy.
However, no matter how delicately MongoDB does it, moving chunks adds load.
This means that if you wait until your cluster is running at capacity to add more shards, adding a new shard can bring your application to a grinding halt through a chain reaction.
Say your existing shards are just about maxed out, so you bring up a new shard to help with the load.
The balancer pokes Shard 1 and asks it to send a chunk to the new shard.
Shard 1 has just enough memory to keep your application’s working set of data in RAM, and now it’s going to have to pull a whole chunk into memory.
The data that your application is using starts getting shunted out of RAM to make room for the chunk.
This means that your application starts having to do disk seeks and MongoDB is doing disk seeks for chunk data.
As queries start taking longer, requests begin to pile up, exacerbating the problem (see Figure 3-2)
The lesson? Add shards while you still have room to maneuver.
If you no longer have that room, add shards in the middle of the night (or at another non-busy time)
If you don’t have a non-busy time and you waited too long, there are a couple of ways to hack around it, but they are neither fun nor easy.
You can manually create a Frankenstein shard from backups of your existing shard, manually change the config.chunks collection, and restart your whole cluster—this is obviously not recommended.) Add shards early and often.
One interesting thing about adding subsequent shards is that they don’t have to be empty.
They cannot have databases that already exist in the cluster, but if your cluster has a foo database and you add a shard with a bar database, that’s fine, as the config servers will pick up on it and it’ll pop up in cluster info.
Therefore, if you want, you can bring together a couple different systems into one large, sharded cluster.
Someone might shard too early or they realize that they chose the wrong shard key, so they want to get everything back onto one shard, dump, restore, and try again.
The removeShard command lets you take a shard out of the cluster.
As mentioned above, moving data from shard to shard is pretty slow.
The removeShard command returns immediately, and you must poll it to find out if it has finished.
Moving chunks can force data out of RAM, making more requests hit disk and slowing everything down.
Once it’s done, its status will change to “completed.” Then, you can safely shut down the shard (or use it as a non-sharded MongoDB server)
This means that shard has been completely drained and may be shut down or used for other purposes.
Changing Servers in a Shard If you’re using a replica set, you can add or remove servers from the replica set and your mongos will pick up on the change.
To modify your replica set in a cluster, do the exact same thing you would do if it was running independently: connect to the primary (not through mongos) and make any configuration changes you need.
Querying a MongoDB cluster is usually identical to querying a single mongod.
However, there are some exceptions that are worth knowing about.
Querying If you are using replica sets as shards and a mongos version 1.7.4 or more recent, you can distribute reads to slaves in a cluster.
This can be handy for handling read load, although the usual caveats on querying slaves apply: you must be willing to get older data.
Counting When you do a count on a sharded collection, you may not get the results you expect.
You may get quite a few more documents than actually exist.
The way a count works is the mongos forwards the count command to every shard in the cluster.
Then, each shard does a count and sends its results back to the mongos,
If there is a migration occurring, many documents can be present (and thus counted) on more than one shard.
When MongoDB migrates a chunk, it starts copying it from one shard to another.
It still routes all reads and writes to that chunk to the old shard, but it is gradually being populated on the other shard.
Once the chunk has finished “moving,” it actually exists on both shards.
As the final step, MongoDB updates the config servers and deletes the copy of the data from the original shard (see Figure 4-1)
A chunk is migrated by copying it to the new shard, then deleting it from the shard it came from.
Thus, when data is counted, it ends up getting counted twice.
MongoDB may hack around this in the future, but for now, keep in mind that counts may overshoot the actual number of documents.
Unique Indexes Suppose we were sharding on email and wanted to have a unique index on username.
One application server adds a new user document with the following fields:
This means that they run into the same problem unique indexes do: there’s no good way of guaranteeing that something happens once across multiple shards.
If you’re doing a single-document update, it must use the shard key in the criteria (update’s first argument)
If you run across an odd error message, consider whether the operation you’re trying to perform would have to atomically look at the entire cluster.
MapReduce When you run a MapReduce on a cluster, each shard performs its own map and reduce.
Once the data is reduced to its final form, it will be output in whatever method you’ve specified.
As sharding splits the job across multiple machines, it can perform MapReduces faster than a single server.
These temporary collections were dropped when the connection that created them was closed.
This worked well on a single server, but mongos keeps its own connection pools and never closes connections to shards.
Thus, temporary collections were never cleaned up (because the connection that created them never closed), and they would just hang around forever, growing more and more numerous.
If you’re running 1.6 and doing MapReduces, you’ll have to manually clean up your temporary collections.
You can run the following function to delete all of the temporary collections in a given database:
In later versions, MapReduce forces you to choose to do something with your output.
Whereas the last chapter covered working with MongoDB from an application developer’s standpoint, this chapter covers some more operational aspects of running a cluster.
Once you have a cluster up and running, how do you know what’s going on?
Using the Shell As with a single instance of MongoDB, most administration on a cluster can be done through the mongo shell.
It gathers all the important information about your cluster and presents it nicely for you.
The config Collections mongos forward your requests to the appropriate shard—except for when you query the config database.
Accessing the config database patches you through to the config servers, and it is where you can find all the cluster’s configuration information.
If you do have a collection with hundreds or thousands of chunks, it’s worth it to learn about the contents of the config database so you can query for specific info, instead of getting a summary of your entire setup.
Assuming you have a cluster set up, you should see these collections:
Many of the collections are just accounting for what’s in the cluster: config.mongos.
If you bring up a mongos, even if it’s just for a few seconds, it will be added to this list and will never disappear.
It doesn’t really matter, it’s not like you’re going to be bringing up millions of mongos servers, but it’s something to be aware of so you don’t get confused if you look at the list.
Currently, config.settings allows you to change the chunk size (but don’t!) and turn off the balancer, which you usually shouldn’t need to do.
If it’s in the middle of a balancing round, it won’t turn off until the current balancing has finished.
The only other collection that might be of interest is the config.changelog collection.
It is a very detailed log of every split and migrate that happens.
You can use it to retrace the steps that got your cluster to whatever its current configuration is.
You might connect to a config server or a shard if you’re trying to do something unusual.
This might be looking at a shard’s data directly or manually editing a messed up.
For example, you’ll have to connect directly to a shard to change a replica set configuration.
Remember that config servers and shards are just normal mongods; anything you know how to do on a mongod you can do on a config server or shard.
However, in the normal course of operation, you should almost never have to connect to them.
Monitoring Monitoring is crucially important when you have a cluster.
All of the advice for monitoring a single node applies when monitoring many nodes, so make sure you have read the documentation on monitoring.
Don’t forget that your network becomes more of a factor when you have multiple machines.
If a server says that it can’t reach another server, investigate the possibility that the network between two has gone down.
Making a connection requires MongoDB to briefly give the connection a lock, which can be a problem for debugging.
Say a server is acting funny, so you fire up a shell to look at it.
Unfortunately, the mongod is stuck in a write lock, so the shell will sit there forever trying to acquire the lock and never finish connecting.
To be on the safe side, leave a shell open.
It gives you tons of information about what’s going on with a server, from load to page faulting to number of connections open.
If you’re running a cluster, you can start up a separate mongostat for every server, but you can also run mongostat --discover on a mongos and it will figure out every member of the cluster and display their stats.
For example, if we start up a cluster using the simple-setup.py script described in Chapter 4, it will find all the mongos processes and all of the shards:
These fields show how many connections are queued for reads and writes and how many are actively reading and writing.
The Web Admin Interface If you’re using replica sets for shards, make sure you start them with the --rest option.
Backups Taking backups on a running cluster turns out to be a difficult problem.
Data is constantly being added and removed by the application, as usual, but it’s also being moved around by the balancer.
If you take a dump of a shard today and restore it tomorrow, you may have the same documents in two places or end up missing some documents altogether (see Figure 5-1)
The problem with taking backups is that you usually only want to restore parts of your cluster (you don’t want to restore the entire cluster from yesterday’s backup, just the node that went down)
If you restore data from a backup, you have to be careful.
Look at the config servers and see which chunks are supposed to be on the shard you’re restoring.
Then only restore data from those chunks using your backups (and mongorestore)
If you want a snapshot of the whole cluster, you would have to turn off the balancer, fsync and lock the slaves in the cluster, take dumps from them, then unlock them and restart the balancer.
Suggestions on Architecture You can create a sharded cluster and leave it at that, but what happens when you want to do routine maintenance? There are a few extra pieces you can add that will make your setup easier to manage.
Create an Emergency Site The name implies that you’re running a website, but this applies to most types of application.
If you need to bring your application down occasionally (e.g., to do maintenance, roll out changes, or in an emergency), it’s very handy to have an emergency site that you can switch over to.
The emergency site should not use your cluster at all.
If it uses a database, it should be completely disconnected from your main database.
You could also have it serve data from a cache or be a completely static site, depending on your application.
It’s a good idea to set up something for users to look at, though, other than an Apache error page.
Create a Moat A excellent way to prevent or minimize all sorts of problems is to create a virtual moat around your machines and control access to the cluster via a queue.
If the shard crashes after the migrate is complete and restored from backup, the cluster will be missing the migrated chunk.
A queue can allow your application to continue handling writes in a planned outage, or at least prevent any writes that didn’t quite make it before the outage from getting lost.
You can keep them on the queue until MongoDB is up again and then send them to the mongos.
A queue isn’t only useful for disasters—it can also be helpful in regulating bursty traffic.
A queue can hold the burst and release a nice, constant stream of requests, instead of allowing a sudden flood to swamp the cluster.
You can also use a queue going the other way: to cache results coming out of MongoDB.
There are lots of different queues you could use: Amazon’s SQS, RabbitMQ, or even a MongoDB capped collection (although make sure it’s on a separate server than the cluster it’s protecting)
For example, they don’t work with applications that need real-time data.
However, if you have an application that can stand small delays, a queue can be useful intermediary between the world and your database.
What to Do When Things Go Wrong As mentioned in the first chapter, network partitions, server crashes, and other problems can cause a whole variety of issues.
MongoDB can “self-heal,” at least temporarily, from many of these issues.
This section covers which outages you can sleep through and which ones you can’t, as well as preparing your application to deal with outages.
A Shard Goes Down If an entire shard goes down, reads and writes that would have hit that shard will return errors.
Your application should handle those errors (it’ll be whatever your language’s equivalent of an exception is, thrown as you iterated through a cursor)
For example, if the first three results for some query were on the shard that is up and the next shard containing useful chunks is down, you’d get something like:
Be prepared to handle this error and keep going gracefully.
Depending on your application, you could also do exclusively targeted queries until the shard comes back online.
Support will be added for partial query results in the future (post-1.8.0), which will only return results from shards that are up and not indicate that there were any problems.
Most of a Shard Is Down If you are using replica sets for shards, hopefully an entire shard won’t go down, but merely a server or two in the set.
If the set loses a majority of its members, no one will be able to become master (without manual rejiggering), and so the set will be read-only.
If a set becomes read-only, make sure your application is only sending it reads and using slaveOkay.
If you’re using replica sets, hopefully a single server (or even a few servers) failing won’t affect your application at all.
The other servers in the set will pick up the slack and your application won’t even notice the change.
In 1.6, if a replica set configuration changes, there may be a zillion identical messages printed to the log.
Every connection between mongos and the shard prints a message when it notices that its replica set connection is out-of-date and updates it.
However, it shouldn’t have an impact on what’s actually happening—it’s just a lot of sound and fury.
This has been fixed for 1.8; mongos is much smarter about updating replica set configurations.
Config Servers Going Down If a config server goes down, there will be no immediate impact on cluster performance, but no configuration changes can be made.
All the config servers work in concert, so none of the other config servers can make any changes while even a single of their brethren have fallen.
The thing to note about config servers is that no configuration can change while a config server is down—you can’t add mongos servers, you can’t migrate data, you can’t add or remove databases or collections, and you can’t change replica set configurations.
If a config server crashes, do get it back up so that your config can change when it needs to, but it shouldn’t affect the immediate operation of your cluster at all.
Make sure you monitor config servers and, if one fails, get it right back up.
Having a config server go down can put some pressure on your servers if there is a migrate in progress.
One of the last steps of the migrate is to update the config servers.
Because one server is down, they can’t be updated, so the shards will have to back out the migration and delete all the data they just painstakingly copied.
If your shards aren’t overloaded, this shouldn’t be too painful, but it is a bit of a waste.
Mongos Processes Going Down As you can always have extra mongos processes and they have no state, it’s not too big a deal if one goes down.
The recommended setup is to run one mongos on each appserver and have each appserver talk to its local mongos (Figure 5-2)
Then, if the whole machine goes down, no one is trying to talk to a mongos that isn’t there.
Have a couple extra mongos servers out there that you can fail over to if one mongos process crashes while the application server is still okay.
Most drivers let you specify a list of servers to connect to and will try them in order.
So, you could specify your preferred mongos first, then your backup mongos.
If one goes down, your application can handle the exception (in whatever language you’re using) and the driver will automatically shunt the application over to your backup mongos for the next request.
You can also just try restarting a crashed mongos if the machine is okay, as they are stateless and store no data.
Other Considerations Each of the points above is handled in isolation from anything else that could go wrong.
Sometimes, if you have a network partition, you might lose entire shards, parts of other shards, config servers, and mongos processes.
Finally, MongoDB tries to let a lot go wrong before exposing a loss of functionality.
If you have the perfect storm (and you will), you’ll lose functionality, but day-to-day server crashes, power outages, and network partitions shouldn’t cause huge problems.
If you follow the advice in the preceding chapters, you should be well on your way to an efficient and predictable distributed system that can grow as you need.
If you’re interested in learning more about sharding, there are quite a few resources available:
The MongoDB wiki has a large section on sharding, with everything from configuration examples to discussions of internals.
The MongoDB user list is a great place to ask questions.
There are lots of useful little pieces of code in the mongo-snippets repository.
Boxed Ice runs a production MongoDB cluster and often writes useful articles in.
If you’re interested in reading more about distributed computing theory, I highly.
Also, if you enjoyed this, I write a blog that mostly covers advanced MongoDB topics.
Ascending Shard Key Keys that this rule applies to Exceptions to the rule.
