In this package, you will find: A Biography of the author of the book.
A preview chapter from the book, Chapter NO.2 "Understanding Solr"
About the Author Hrishikesh Karambelkar is a software architect with a blend of entrepreneurial and.
On a technical note, Hrishikesh has worked on many challenging problems in the.
While writing the book, I spend my late nights and weekends.
I would like to thank the Apache community users who.
Scaling Big Data with Hadoop and Solr This book will provide users with a step-by-step guide to work with Big Data using.
It starts with a basic understanding of Hadoop and Solr, and gradually.
You will learn various architectures and data workflows for distributed search system.
This book later demonstrates two real world use cases about how Hadoop and Solr can be.
It then gets you into using different algorithms for Big.
MapReduce program to build distributed Solr indexes for different approaches.
Understanding Solr The exponential growth of data coming from various applications over the past decade has created many challenges.
Handling such massive data demanded focus on the development of scalable search engines.
Apache Lucene along with Mahout and Solr were developed to address these needs.
Out of these, Mahout was moved as a separate Apache top-level project, and Apache Solr was merged into the Lucene project itself.
Apache Solr  is an open source enterprise search application which provides user abilities to search structured as well as unstructured data across the organization.
It is based on the Apache Lucene libraries for information retrieval.
Apache Lucene is an open source information retrieval library used widely by various organizations.
Apache Solr is completely developed on Java stack of technologies.
Apache Solr is a web application, and Apache Lucene is a library consumed by Apache Solr for performing search.
We will try to understand Apache Solr in this chapter, while covering the following topics:
Installing Solr Apache Solr comes  by default  with a demo server based on Jetty, which can be downloaded and run.
However, you can choose to customize it, and deploy it in your own environment.
Before installation, you need to make sure that you have JDK 1.5 or above on your machines.
You can download the stable installer from http://lucene.apache.org/solr/ or from its nightly builds running on the same site.
You may also need a utility called  curl to run your samples.
There are commercial versions of Apache Solr available from a company called  LucidWorks (http://www.lucidworks.com)
Solr being a web-based application can run on many operating systems such as *nix and Windows.
Some of the older versions of Solr have failed to run properly due to locale differences on host systems.
If your system's default locale, or character set is non-english (that is, en/en-US), for safety, you can override your system defaults for Solr by passing -Duser.language and -Duser.country in your Jetty to ensure smooth running of Solr.
If you are  planning to run  Solr in your own container, you need to deploy solr.war from the distribution to your container.
You can simply check whether your instance is running or not by accessing its admin page available at http://localhost:8983/ solr/admin.
You can compile the source by simply navigating to Solr directory and running Ant from the directory.
Apache Solr architecture Apache Solr is  composed  of multiple modules, some of them being separate projects in themselves.
Apache Solr can run as a single core or multicore.
A Solr core is nothing but the running instance of a Solr index along with its confi guration.
Earlier, Apache Solr had a single core which in turn limited the consumers to run Solr on one application through a single schema and confi guration fi le.
With this support, now, one can run one Solr instance for multiple schemas and confi gurations with unifi ed administrations.
You can run Solr in multicore with the following command:
Storage The  storage of Apache Solr is mainly used for storing metadata and the actual index information.
It is  typically a fi le store locally, confi gured in the confi guration of Apache Solr.
The default Solr installation package comes with a Jetty server, the respective confi guration can be found in the solr.home/conf folder of Solr install.
There are two major confi guration fi les in Solr described as follows:
File name Description solrconfig.xml This is the  main configuration file of your Solr install.
For example, Solr implementation for log management would have schema with log-related attributes such as log levels, severity, message type, container name, application name, and so on.
It also provides additional parameters such as zookeeper timeout, transient cache size, and so on.
Apache Solr (underlying Lucene) indexing  is a specially designed data structure, stored in the  fi le  system as a set of index fi les.
The index is designed with specifi c format in such a way to maximize the query performance.
Solr engine A Solr engine  is nothing but the engine responsible for making Solr what it is today.
A Solr engine with metadata confi guration together forms the Solr core.
When Solr runs in a replication mode, the index replicator is responsible for distributing indexes across multiple slaves.
The master server maintains index updates, and slaves are responsible for talking with master to get them replicated.
Apache Lucene core gets Solr such as index, query processing, searching data, ranking matched results, and returning them back.
The query parser Apache Lucene comes  with variety of query implementations.
Query parser  is responsible for parsing the queries passed by the end search as a search string.
IndexSearcher is a basic component of Solr searched with a default base searcher class.
This class is responsible for returning ordered matched results of searched keywords ranked as per the computed score.
IndexReader provides access to indexes stored in the fi le system.
Similar to IndexReader, IndexWriter allows you to create and maintain indexes in Apache Lucene.
Tokenizer breaks fi eld data into lexical units or tokens.
Filter examines fi eld of tokens from Tokenizer and either it keeps them, transforms them, discards them, or creates new ones.
Tokenizer and Filter together form chain or pipeline of analyzers.
Analyzing process is used for indexing as well as querying by Solr.
They play an important role in speeding up the query as well as index time; they also reduce the amount of data that gets  generated out of these operations.
You can defi ne your own customer analyzers depending  upon your use case.
The following diagram shows the example of a fi lter:
It consists of different UI templates, request/response handlers, and different faceting provided by Solr.
Faceted browsing  is one of the main features of Apache Solr; it helps users reach the right set of information they wanted to get.
The facets and components deal with providing the faceted search capabilities on top of Lucene.
When a user fi res a search query on Solr, it actually gets passed on to a request handler.
This handler is designed to work for simple user queries.
You can visit here to fi nd more details about this handler.
Query parser is responsible for parsing the queries, and converting it into Lucene query objects.
There are different types of parsers available (Lucene, DisMax, eDisMax, and so on)
Each parser offers different functionalities and it can be used based on the requirements.
Once a query is parsed, it hands it over to index searcher or reader.
The job of index reader  is to run the queries on index store, and gather the results to response writer.
Response Writer  is responsible  for responding back to the client; it formats the query response based on search outcomes from the Lucene engine.
The following diagram displays complete process fl ow when a search is fi red from a client:
Apache Solr ships with an example schema that runs using Apache velocity.
Apache velocity is a fast, open source template engine which quickly generates an HTML-based frontend.
Index handler  is one type of update handler that handles the task of addition, updation, and deletion of document for indexing.
Apache Solr supports updates through index handler through JSON, XML, and text format.
Data Import Handler (DIH)  provides a mechanism for integrating different data sources with Apache Solr for indexing.
The data sources could be relational databases or web-based sources (for example, RSS, ATOM feeds, and e-mails)
Although DIH is part of Solr development, the default installation does not include it in the Solr application.
Apache Tika, a project in  itself extends capabilities of Apache Solr to run on top of different types of fi les.
When assigned a document to Tika, it automatically determines the  type of fi le (that is, Word, Excel, or PDF) and extracts the content.
Tika  also extracts document metadata such as author, title, creation date, and so on, which if provided in schema go as text fi eld in Apache Solr.
Interaction Apache Solr, although a  web-based application, can be integrated  with different technologies.
So, if a company has Drupal-based e-commerce site, they can integrate Apache Solr application and provide its rich faceted search to the user.
Client APIs and SolrJ client Apache Solr client  provides  different ways of  talking with Apache Solr web application.
This enables Solr to easily get integrated with any application.
Using client APIs, consumers can run search, and perform different operations on indexes.
SolrJ client  enables any Java application to talk directly with Solr through its extensive library of APIs.
Other interfaces Apache Solr  can be integrated with other various technologies using its API library and standards-based interfacing.
JavaScript-based clients can straightaway talk with Solr using JSON-based messaging.
Similarly, other technologies can simply connect to Apache Solr running instance through HTTP, and consume its services either through JSON, XML, and text formats.
Confi guring Apache Solr search Apache Solr allows extensive  confi guration to meet the needs of the  consumer.
Let's look at all these steps to understand the confi guration of Apache Solr.
Defi ning a Schema for your instance Apache Solr  lets you defi ne the structure of your data to extend support for searching across the traditional keyword search.
You can allow Solr to understand the structure of your data (coming from various sources) by defi ning fi elds in the schema defi nition fi le.
These fi elds once defi ned, will be made available at the time of data import or data upload.
The schema is stored in the schema.xml fi le in the etc folder of Apache Solr.
Apache Solr ships with a default schema.xml file, which you have to change to fi t your needs.
In schema confi guration, you can defi ne fi eld types, (for example, String, Integer, Date), and map them to respective Java classes.
Apache Solr ships with default data types for text, integer, date, and so on.
This enables users to defi ne the custom type in case if they wish to.
Then you can defi ne the fi elds with name and type pointing to one of the defi ned types.
A fi eld in Solr will have the following major attributes:
Name Description default Sets default value, if not read while importing a document indexed True, when it has to be indexed (that is, can be searched,
Each Solr  instance should have a unique identifi er fi eld (ID) although it's not mandatory condition.
In addition to static fi elds, you can also use Solr dynamic fi elds for getting the fl exibility in case if you do not know the schema affront.
Use the <dynamicField> declaration for creating a fi eld rule to allow Solr understands which data type to be used.
You can also index same data into multiple fi elds by using the <copyField> directive.
You might generate indexes for two different fi elds, company name and model number.
You can defi ne Tokenizers specifi c to your fi eld types.
Similarly, a Lucene class responsible for scoring the matched results.
Solr allows you to override default similarity behavior through the <similarity> declaration.
Similarity can be confi gured at the global level; however with Solr 4.0, it extends similarity to be confi gured at the fi eld level.
Confi guring a Solr instance Once a schema is  confi gured, next step would be to confi gure the  instance itself.
To confi gure the instance, you need to touch  upon many fi les, some of them are confi guration fi les, and some of them are metadata fi les.
The entire confi guration is part of /conf directory where Solr instance is setup.
You can simply run examples by going to the examples/example-docs directory and running the following code:
Confi guration fi les There are two major confi gurations that go in the Solr confi guration: namely, solrconfig.xml and solr.xml.
Among these, solr.xml  is responsible for maintaining confi guration  for logging, cloud setup, and Solr core primarily, whereas solrconfig.xml focuses more on the Solr application front.
Let's look at the  solrconfig.xml fi le, and understand all the important declarations you'd be using frequently.
Directive Description luceneMatchVersion It tells which version of Lucene/Solr the solrconfig.
When upgrading your Solr instances, you need to modify this attribute.
The libraries are loaded in the same sequence that of the configuration order.
The paths are relative; you can also specify regular expressions.
Directive Description dataDir By default Solr uses ./data directory for storing indexes,
There are three types: single (one process at a time), native (native operating system driven), and simple (based on locking using plain files)
The entire configuration for updateHandler goes as a part of this directive.
Listener Using this directive, you can subscribe to update events when IndexWriter is updating the index.
The listeners can be run either at the time of postCommit or postOptimize.
Query This directive is mainly responsible for controlling different parameters at the query time.
Directive Description requestDispatcher By setting parameters in this directive, you can control how.
The updateRequestProcessor chain defines how update requests are processed; you can define your own updateRequestProcessor to perform things such as cleaning up data, optimizing text fields, and so on.
You can extend your Solr instance to have responses for XML, JSON, PHP, Ruby, Python, and CSVS by enabling respective predefined writers.
If you have a custom requirement for a certain type of response, it can easily be extended.
Apache Solr contains predefined query parsers such as Lucene (default), DisMax (based on weights of fields), and eDisMax (similar to DisMax, with some additional features)
Request handlers and search components Apache Solr gets requests for  searching on data or index generation.
In  such cases, RequestHandler is the directive  through which you can defi ne different ways of tackling these requests.
One request handler is assigned with one relative URL where it would serve the request.
A request handler may or may not provide search facility.
In case if it provides, it is also called searchHandler.
UpdateRequestHandler is responsible for updating the process of the index.
Similarly, CSVRequestHandler and JsonUpdateRequestHandler takes the responsibility of updating the indexes with CSV and JSON formats, respectively.
ExtractingRequestHandler uses Apache Tika to extract the text out of different fi le formats.
By default, there are some important URLs confi gured with Apache Solr which are listed as follows:
AdminHandler has multiple subhandlers defined; /admin/ ping is used for health checkup.
A searchComponent is a one of the main feature of Apache Solr.
It brings the capability of enhancing new features to Apache Solr.
These components can be defi ned, and then they can be used in any of the requestHandler directives.
Some components also allow access through either searchComponent, or directly as a separate request handler.
You can alternatively specify your query parser in the context of your requestHandler.
Facet Facets  are  one of the primary features of Apache Solr.
Your search results can be organized in different formats through facets.
This is an effective way of helping users to drill down to right set of information.
The following screenshot shows one of a customized instance of Apache Solr with facets on the left-hand side:
So, considering the log-based search, you can create facets based on the log severity.
Facet Description Field-value You can have your schema fields as facet component here.
Range Range faceting is mostly used on date/numeric fields, and it supports.
You can specify start and end dates, gap in the range, and so on.
Date This is a deprecated faceting, and it is now being handled in the range faceting itself.
Pivot Pivot gives you the ability to perform simple math on your data.
With this facet, you can summarize your results, and then you can get them sorted, and take average.
This gives you hierarchical results (also sometimes called hierarchical faceting)
MoreLikeThis The Solr-based search results are enhanced with the  MoreLikeThis component, because  they provide a better user-browsing experience by allowing the user to choose similar results.
This component can be accessed either through requestHandler, or through searchcomponent.
Highlight The matched search  string can be highlighted in the search results when a user fi res a query to Apache Solr through the  highlight search component.
SpellCheck Searching in Solr can be  extended further with the support for spell checks using the spellcheck component.
You  can get support for multiple dictionaries together per fi eld.
It also has a Suggestor that responds to user with Did you mean type of suggestions.
Additionally, Suggestor with autocomplete feature starts providing users options right at the time when user is typing search query enhancing the overall experience.
Metadata management We have already seen  the solr.xml, solrconfig.xml, and schema.xml confi guration fi les.
Besides these, there are other fi les  where a metadata can be specifi ed.
These fi les again appear in the conf directory of Apache Solr.
File name Description protwords.txt In this file, you can specify protected words that you do not.
For example, a stemmer might stem the word catfish to cat or fish.
This overrides Lucene's standard ranking scheme taking into account the elevations from this file.
File name Description synonyms.txt Using this file, you can specify your own synonyms.
Loading your data for search Once a Solr  instance is  confi gured, next step is to index your data, and then simply use the instance for querying and analyzing.
Apache Solr/Lucene is designed in such a way that it allows you to plugin any type of data from any data source in the world.
If you have structured data, it makes sense to extract the structured information, create exhaustive Solr schema ,and feed in the data to Solr, effectively adding different data dimensions to your search.
Data Import Handler (DIH)  is used mainly for indexing structured data.
It is mainly associated with data sources such as relational databases, XML databases, RSS feeds, and ATOM feeds.
For example, in a relational database, a table or a view can be viewed as an entity.
There are different ways to load the data in Apache Solr as shown in the following diagram:
ExtractingRequestHandler/Solr Cell Solr Cell  is one of the most powerful handlers for uploading any type of data.
If you wish you can run Solr on a set of fi les/unstructured data containing different formats such as MS Offi ce, PDF, e-book, e-mail, text, and so on.
In Apache Tika, text extraction is based purely on how exhaustive any fi le is.
Therefore, if you have a PDF of scanned images containing text, Apache Tika won't be able to extract any of the text out of it.
In such cases, you need to use  Optical Character Recognition (OCR)-based software to bring in such functionality for Solr.
You can simply try this on your downloaded curl utility, and then running it on your document:
Index handlers such as SimplePostTool, UpdateRequestHandler, and SolrJ provide addition, updation, and deletion of documents to index them for XML, JSON, and CSV format.
Curl/wget utilities can be used for uploading data to Solr in your environment.
They are command line based; you can also use the FireCURL plugin to upload data through your Firefox browser.
Simple post tool is a command-line tool for uploading the raw data to Apache Solr.
You can simply run it on any fi le or type in your input through STDIN to load it in Apache Solr.
SolrJ SolrJ  or (SolrJava) is a tool that can be used by your Java-based application to connect to Apache Solr for indexing.
It provides a user-friendly interface hiding connection details from consumer application.
Using SolrJ, you can index your documents and perform your queries.
There are two major ways to do so; one is using the EmbeddedSolrServer interface.
If you are using Solr in an embedded application, this is the recommended interface suited for you.
The other way is to use the HTTPSolrServer interface, which talks with Solr server through HTTP protocol.
This is suited if you have a remote client-server based application.
You can use ConcurrentUpdateSolrServer for bulk uploads whereas CloudSolrServer for communicating with Solr running in a cloud setup.
In analyzing and querying your data, we have already seen how Apache Solr effectively uses different request handlers to provide consumers with extensive ways of getting search results.
Each request handler uses its own query parser, which extracts the parameters and their values from the query string, and forms the Lucene query objects.
Standard query parser allows greater precision over  search data; DisMaxQueryParser and  ExtendedDisMaxQueryParser provide a Google-like searching syntax while searching.
Depending upon which request handler is called, the query syntax is changed.
Searches for the descriptions containing Java and sql in a single document with a proximity of 10 words maximum.
Summary We have gone through various details of Apache Solr in this chapter.
We reviewed the architecture, the confi guration, the data loading, and its features.
In the next chapter, we will look into how you can bring the two worlds of Apache Solr and Apache Hadoop together to work with Big Data.
