This paper describes how Spanner is structured, its feature set, the rationale underlying various design decisions, and a novel time API that exposes clock uncertainty.
This API and its implementation are critical to supporting external consistency and a variety of powerful features: nonblocking reads in the past, lock-free read-only transactions, and atomic schema changes, across all of Spanner.
At the highest level of abstraction, it is a database that shards data across many sets of Paxos [21] state machines in datacenters spread all over the world.
Replication is used for global availability and geographic locality; clients automatically failover between replicas.
Spanner automatically reshards data across machines as the amount of data or the number of servers changes, and it automatically migrates data across machines (even across datacenters) to balance load and in response to failures.
Spanner is designed to scale up to millions of machines across hundreds of datacenters and trillions of database rows.
Applications can use Spanner for high availability, even in the face of wide-area natural disasters, by replicating their data within or even across continents.
Even though many projects happily use Bigtable [9], we have also consistently received complaints from users that Bigtable can be difficult to use for some kinds of applications: those that have complex, evolving schemas, or those that want strong consistency in the presence of wide-area replication.
As a consequence, Spanner has evolved from a Bigtable-like versioned key-value store into a temporal multi-version database.
Data is stored in schematized semi-relational tables; data is versioned, and each version is automatically timestamped with its commit time; old versions of data are subject to configurable garbage-collection policies; and applications can read data at old timestamps.
Spanner supports general-purpose transactions, and provides a SQL-based query language.
First, the replication configurations for data can be dynamically controlled at a fine grain by applications.
Applications can specify constraints to control which datacenters contain which data, how far data is from its users (to control read latency), how far replicas are from each other (to control write latency), and how many replicas are maintained (to control durability, availability, and read performance)
Data can also be dynamically and transparently moved between datacenters by the system to balance resource usage across datacenters.
Second, Spanner has two features that are difficult to implement in a distributed database: it.
These features enable Spanner to support consistent backups, consistent MapReduce executions [12], and atomic schema updates, all at global scale, and even in the presence of ongoing transactions.
Spanner is the first system to provide such guarantees at global scale.
The key enabler of these properties is a new TrueTime API and its implementation.
The API directly exposes clock uncertainty, and the guarantees on Spanner’s timestamps depend on the bounds that the implementation provides.
If the uncertainty is large, Spanner slows down to wait out that uncertainty.
Google’s cluster-management software provides an implementation of the TrueTime API.
This implementation keeps uncertainty small (generally less than 10ms) by using multiple modern clock references (GPS and atomic clocks)
Section 2 describes the structure of Spanner’s implementation, its feature set, and the engineering decisions that went into their design.
Section 3 describes our new TrueTime API and sketches its implementation.
This section describes the structure of and rationale underlying Spanner’s implementation.
It then describes the directory abstraction, which is used to manage replication and locality, and is the unit of data movement.
Finally, it describes our data model, why Spanner looks like a relational database instead of a key-value store, and how applications can control data locality.
Given that Spanner manages data globally, there will be only a handful of running universes.
Spanner is organized as a set of zones, where each zone is the rough analog of a deployment of Bigtable.
The set of zones is also the set of locations across which data can be replicated.
Zones can be added to or removed from a running system as new datacenters are brought into service and old ones are turned off, respectively.
Zones are also the unit of physical isolation: there may be one or more zones in a datacenter, for example, if different applications’ data must be partitioned across different sets of servers in the same datacenter.
A zone has one zonemaster and between one hundred and several thousand spanservers.
The former assigns data to spanservers; the latter serve data to clients.
The per-zone location proxies are used by clients to locate the spanservers assigned to serve their data.
The universe master and the placement driver are currently singletons.
The universe master is primarily a console that displays status information about all the zones for interactive debugging.
The placement driver handles automated movement of data across zones on the timescale of minutes.
The placement driver periodically communicates with the spanservers to find data that needs to be moved, either to meet updated replication constraints or to balance load.
For space reasons, we will only describe the spanserver in any detail.
This section focuses on the spanserver implementation to illustrate how replication and distributed transactions have been layered onto our Bigtable-based implementation.
A tablet is similar to Bigtable’s tablet abstraction, in that it implements a bag of the following mappings:
Unlike Bigtable, Spanner assigns timestamps to data, which is an important way in which Spanner is more like a multi-version database than a key-value store.
To support replication, each spanserver implements a single Paxos state machine on top of each tablet.
An early Spanner incarnation supported multiple Paxos state machines per tablet, which allowed for more flexible replication configurations.
The complexity of that design led us to abandon it.) Each state machine stores its metadata and log in its corresponding tablet.
Our Paxos implementation supports long-lived leaders with time-based leader leases, whose length defaults to 10 seconds.
The current Spanner implementation logs every Paxos write twice: once in the tablet’s log, and once in the Paxos log.
This choice was made out of expediency, and we are likely to remedy this eventually.
Our implementation of Paxos is pipelined, so as to improve Spanner’s throughput in the presence of WAN latencies; but writes are applied by Paxos in order (a fact on which we will depend in Section 4)
The Paxos state machines are used to implement a consistently replicated bag of mappings.
The key-value mapping state of each replica is stored in its corresponding tablet.
Writes must initiate the Paxos protocol at the leader; reads access state directly from the underlying tablet at any replica that is sufficiently up-to-date.
At every replica that is a leader, each spanserver implements a lock table to implement concurrency control.
The lock table contains the state for two-phase locking: it maps ranges of keys to lock states.
Note that having a long-lived Paxos leader is critical to efficiently managing the lock table.) In both Bigtable and Spanner, we designed for long-lived transactions (for example, for report generation, which might take on the order of minutes), which perform poorly under optimistic concurrency control in the presence of conflicts.
Figure 3: Directories are the unit of data movement between Paxos groups.
At every replica that is a leader, each spanserver also implements a transaction manager to support distributed transactions.
The transaction manager is used to implement a participant leader; the other replicas in the group will be referred to as participant slaves.
If a transaction involves only one Paxos group (as is the case for most transactions), it can bypass the transaction manager, since the lock table and Paxos together provide transactionality.
If a transaction involves more than one Paxos group, those groups’ leaders coordinate to perform twophase commit.
One of the participant groups is chosen as the coordinator: the participant leader of that group will be referred to as the coordinator leader, and the slaves of that group as coordinator slaves.
The state of each transaction manager is stored in the underlying Paxos group (and therefore is replicated)
On top of the bag of key-value mappings, the Spanner implementation supports a bucketing abstraction called a directory, which is a set of contiguous keys that share a common prefix.
The choice of the term directory is a historical accident; a better term might be bucket.) We will explain the source of that prefix in Section 2.3
Supporting directories allows applications to control the locality of their data by choosing keys carefully.
All data in a directory has the same replication configuration.
When data is moved between Paxos groups, it is moved directory by directory, as shown in Figure 3
Spanner might move a directory to shed load from a Paxos group; to put directories that are frequently accessed together into the same group; or to move a directory into a group that is closer to its accessors.
One could expect that a 50MB directory can be moved in a few seconds.
The fact that a Paxos group may contain multiple directories implies that a Spanner tablet is different from.
Instead, a Spanner tablet is a container that may encapsulate multiple partitions of the row space.
We made this decision so that it would be possible to colocate multiple directories that are frequently accessed together.
Movedir is the background task used to move directories between Paxos groups [14]
Movedir is also used to add or remove replicas to Paxos groups [25], because Spanner does not yet support in-Paxos configuration changes.
Movedir is not implemented as a single transaction, so as to avoid blocking ongoing reads and writes on a bulky data move.
Instead, movedir registers the fact that it is starting to move data and moves the data in the background.
When it has moved all but a nominal amount of the data, it uses a transaction to atomically move that nominal amount and update the metadata for the two Paxos groups.
Administrators control two dimensions: the number and types of replicas, and the geographic placement of those replicas.
An application controls how data is replicated, by tagging each database and/or individual directories with a combination of those options.
For example, an application might store each end-user’s data in its own directory, which would enable user A’s data to have three replicas in Europe, and user B’s data to have five replicas in North America.
In fact, Spanner will shard a directory into multiple fragments if it grows too large.
Fragments may be served from different Paxos groups (and therefore different servers)
Movedir actually moves fragments, and not whole directories, between groups.
Spanner exposes the following set of data features to applications: a data model based on schematized semi-relational tables, a query language, and generalpurpose transactions.
The move towards supporting these features was driven by many factors.
The need to support schematized semi-relational tables and synchronous replication is supported by the popularity of Megastore [5]
At least 300 applications within Google use Megastore (despite its relatively low performance) because its data model is simpler to manage than Bigtable’s, and because of its support for synchronous replication across datacenters.
The need to support a SQLlike query language in Spanner was also clear, given the popularity of Dremel [28] as an interactive dataanalysis tool.
Finally, the lack of cross-row transactions in Bigtable led to frequent complaints; Percolator [32] was in part built to address this failing.
We believe it is better to have application programmers deal with performance problems due to overuse of transactions as bottlenecks arise, rather than always coding around the lack of transactions.
The application data model is layered on top of the directory-bucketed key-value mappings supported by the implementation.
An application creates one or more databases in a universe.
Each database can contain an unlimited number of schematized tables.
We will not go into detail about the query language for Spanner.
Spanner’s data model is not purely relational, in that rows must have names.
More precisely, every table is required to have an ordered set of one or more primary-key columns.
This requirement is where Spanner still looks like a key-value store: the primary keys form the name for a row, and each table defines a mapping from the primary-key columns to the non-primary-key columns.
A row has existence only if some value (even if it is NULL) is defined for the row’s keys.
Imposing this structure is useful because it lets applications control data locality through their choices of keys.
Figure 4 contains an example Spanner schema for storing photo metadata on a per-user, per-album basis.
The schema language is similar to Megastore’s, with the additional requirement that every Spanner database must be partitioned by clients into one or more hierarchies of tables.
Client applications declare the hierarchies in database schemas via the INTERLEAVE IN declarations.
The table at the top of a hierarchy is a directory table.
Each row in a directory table with key K, together with all of the rows in descendant tables that start with K in lexicographic order, forms a directory.
The figure also illustrates the interleaved layout for the example database: for.
Figure 4: Example Spanner schema for photo metadata, and the interleaving implied by INTERLEAVE IN.
This interleaving of tables to form directories is significant because it allows clients to describe the locality relationships that exist between multiple tables, which is necessary for good performance in a sharded, distributed database.
Without it, Spanner would not know the most important locality relationships.
The underlying time references used by TrueTime are GPS and atomic clocks.
TrueTime uses two forms of time reference because they have different failure modes.
Atomic clocks can fail in ways uncorrelated to GPS and each other, and over long periods of time can drift significantly due to frequency error.
TrueTime is implemented by a set of time master machines per datacenter and a timeslave daemon per machine.
The majority of masters have GPS receivers with dedicated antennas; these masters are separated physically to reduce the effects of antenna failures, radio interference, and spoofing.
The remaining masters (which we refer to as Armageddon masters) are equipped with atomic clocks.
An atomic clock is not that expensive: the cost of an Armageddon master is of the same order as that of a GPS master.
All masters’ time references are regularly compared against each other.
Each master also cross-checks the rate at which its reference advances time against its own local clock, and evicts itself if there is substantial divergence.
Between synchronizations, Armageddon masters advertise a slowly increasing time uncertainty that is derived from conservatively applied worst-case clock drift.
Every daemon polls a variety of masters [29] to reduce vulnerability to errors from any one master.
Some are GPS masters chosen from nearby datacenters; the rest are GPS masters from farther datacenters, as well as some Armageddon masters.
Daemons apply a variant of Marzullo’s algorithm [27] to detect and reject liars, and synchronize the local machine clocks to the nonliars.
To protect against broken local clocks, machines that exhibit frequency excursions larger than the worstcase bound derived from component specifications and operating environment are evicted.
Table 2: Types of reads and writes in Spanner, and how they compare.
This section describes how TrueTime is used to guarantee the correctness properties around concurrency control, and how those properties are used to implement features such as externally consistent transactions, lockfree read-only transactions, and non-blocking reads in the past.
These features enable, for example, the guarantee that a whole-database audit read at a timestamp t will see exactly the effects of every transaction that has committed as of t.
Going forward, it will be important to distinguish writes as seen by Paxos (which we will refer to as Paxos writes unless the context is clear) from Spanner client writes.
For example, two-phase commit generates a Paxos write for the prepare phase that has no corresponding Spanner client write.
Table 2 lists the types of operations that Spanner supports.
The Spanner implementation supports readwrite transactions, read-only transactions (predeclared snapshot-isolation transactions), and snapshot reads.
Standalone writes are implemented as read-write transactions; non-snapshot standalone reads are implemented as read-only transactions.
Both are internally retried (clients need not write their own retry loops)
A read-only transaction is a kind of transaction that has the performance benefits of snapshot isolation [6]
A read-only transaction must be predeclared as not having any writes; it is not simply a read-write transaction without any writes.
Reads in a read-only transaction execute at a system-chosen timestamp without locking, so that incoming writes are not blocked.
A snapshot read is a read in the past that executes without locking.
A client can either specify a timestamp for a snapshot read, or provide an upper bound on the desired timestamp’s staleness and let Spanner choose a timestamp.
In either case, the execution of a snapshot read proceeds at any replica that is sufficiently up-to-date.
For both read-only transactions and snapshot reads, commit is inevitable once a timestamp has been chosen, unless the data at that timestamp has been garbagecollected.
As a result, clients can avoid buffering results inside a retry loop.
When a server fails, clients can internally continue the query on a different server by repeating the timestamp and the current read position.
Spanner’s Paxos implementation uses timed leases to make leadership long-lived (10 seconds by default)
A potential leader sends requests for timed lease votes; upon receiving a quorum of lease votes the leader knows it has a lease.
A replica extends its lease vote implicitly on a successful write, and the leader requests lease-vote extensions if they are near expiration.
Define a leader’s lease interval as starting when it discovers it has a quorum of lease votes, and as ending when it no longer has a quorum of lease votes (because some have expired)
Spanner depends on the following disjointness invariant: for each Paxos group, each Paxos leader’s lease interval is disjoint from every other leader’s.
The Spanner implementation permits a Paxos leader to abdicate by releasing its slaves from their lease votes.
To preserve the disjointness invariant, Spanner constrains when abdication is permissible.
Define smax to be the maximum timestamp used by a leader.
Before abdicating, a leader must wait until TT.after(smax) is true.
As a result, they can be assigned timestamps at any time.
For a given transaction, Spanner assigns it the timestamp that Paxos assigns to the Paxos write that represents the transaction commit.
Spanner depends on the following monotonicity invariant: within each Paxos group, Spanner assigns timestamps to Paxos writes in monotonically increasing order, even across leaders.
A single leader replica can trivially assign timestamps in monotonically increasing order.
This invariant is enforced across leaders by making use of the disjointness invariant: a leader must only assign timestamps within the interval of its leader lease.
Note that whenever a timestamp s is assigned, smax is advanced to s to preserve disjointness.
Define the start and commit events for a transaction Ti by estarti and e.
The protocol for executing transactions and assigning timestamps obeys two rules, which together guarantee this invariant, as shown below.
Define the arrival event of the commit request at the coordinator leader for a write Ti to be eserveri.
Note that the participant leaders do not matter here; Section 4.2.1 describes how they are involved in the implementation of the next rule.
Commit Wait The coordinator leader ensures that clients cannot see any data committed by Ti until TT.after(si) is true.
Commit wait ensures that si is less than the absolute commit time of Ti, or si < tabs(e.
The implementation of commit wait is described in Section 4.2.1
The monotonicity invariant described in Section 4.1.2 allows Spanner to correctly determine whether a replica’s state is sufficiently up-to-date to satisfy a read.
Every replica tracks a value called safe time tsafe which is the.
A replica can satisfy a read at a timestamp t if t <= tsafe.
For a participant slave, tTMsafe actually refers to the replica’s leader’s transaction manager, whose state the slave can infer through metadata passed on Paxos writes.) If there are any such transactions, then the state affected by those transactions is indeterminate: a participant replica does not know yet whether such transactions will commit.
As we discuss in Section 4.2.1, the commit protocol ensures that every participant knows a lower bound on a prepared transaction’s timestamp.
Every participant leader (for a group g) for a transaction Ti assigns a prepare timestamp spreparei,g to its prepare record.
The coordinator leader ensures that the transaction’s commit timestamp si >= s.
A read-only transaction executes in two phases: assign a timestamp sread [8], and then execute the transaction’s reads as snapshot reads at sread.
The snapshot reads can execute at any replicas that are sufficiently up-to-date.
However, such a timestamp may require the execution of the data reads at sread to block if tsafe has not advanced sufficiently.
In addition, note that choosing a value of sread may also advance smax to preserve disjointness.) To reduce the chances of blocking, Spanner should assign the oldest timestamp that preserves external consistency.
Section 4.2.2 explains how such a timestamp can be chosen.
This section explains some of the practical details of read-write transactions and read-only transactions elided earlier, as well as the implementation of a special transaction type used to implement atomic schema changes.
It then describes some refinements of the basic schemes as described.
Like Bigtable, writes that occur in a transaction are buffered at the client until commit.
As a result, reads in a transaction do not see the effects of the transaction’s writes.
This design works well in Spanner because a read returns the timestamps of any data read, and uncommitted writes have not yet been assigned timestamps.
Reads within read-write transactions use woundwait [33] to avoid deadlocks.
The client issues reads to the leader replica of the appropriate group, which acquires read locks and then reads the most recent data.
While a client transaction remains open, it sends keepalive messages to prevent participant leaders from timing out its transaction.
When a client has completed all reads and buffered all writes, it begins two-phase commit.
The client chooses a coordinator group and sends a commit message to each participant’s leader with the identity of the coordinator and any buffered writes.
Having the client drive two-phase commit avoids sending data twice across wide-area links.
It then chooses a prepare timestamp that must be larger than any timestamps it has assigned to previous transactions (to preserve monotonicity), and logs a prepare record through Paxos.
Each participant then notifies the coordinator of its prepare timestamp.
The coordinator leader also first acquires write locks, but skips the prepare phase.
It chooses a timestamp for the entire transaction after hearing from all other participant leaders.
The coordinator leader then logs a commit record through Paxos (or an abort if it timed out while waiting on the other participants)
Assigning a timestamp requires a negotiation phase between all of the Paxos groups that are involved in the reads.
As a result, Spanner requires a scope expression for every read-only transaction, which is an expression that summarizes the keys that will be read by the entire transaction.
If the scope’s values are served by a single Paxos group, then the client issues the read-only transaction to that group’s leader.
The current Spanner implementation only chooses a timestamp for a read-only transaction at a Paxos leader.) That leader assigns sread and executes the read.
Define LastTS() to be the timestamp of the last committed write at a Paxos group.
If there are no prepared transactions, the assignment sread = LastTS() trivially satisfies external consistency: the transaction will see the result of the last write, and therefore be ordered after it.
If the scope’s values are served by multiple Paxos groups, there are several options.
The most complicated option is to do a round of communication with all of the groups’s leaders to negotiate sread based on LastTS()
All reads in the transaction can be sent to replicas that are sufficiently up-to-date.
It would be infeasible to use a standard transaction, because the number of participants (the number of groups in a database) could be in the millions.
Bigtable supports atomic schema changes in one datacenter, but its schema changes block all operations.
A Spanner schema-change transaction is a generally non-blocking variant of a standard transaction.
First, it is explicitly assigned a timestamp in the future, which is registered in the prepare phase.
As a result, schema changes across thousands of servers can complete with minimal disruption to other concurrent activity.
Second, reads and writes, which implicitly depend on the schema, synchronize with any registered schema-change timestamp at time t: they may proceed if their timestamps precede t, but they must block behind the schemachange transaction if their timestamps are after t.
Without TrueTime, defining the schema change to happen at t would be meaningless.
As a result, no reads can occur at later timestamps, even if the reads do not conflict with the transaction.
This information can be stored in the lock table, which already maps key ranges to lock metadata.
When a read arrives, it only needs to be checked against the fine-grained safe time for key ranges with which the read conflicts.
As a result, the execution of the read could be delayed.
This weakness can be remedied similarly by augmenting LastTS() with a fine-grained mapping from key ranges to commit timestamps in the lock table.
We have not yet implemented this optimization.) When a read-only transaction arrives, its timestamp can be assigned by taking the maximum value of LastTS() for the key ranges with which the transaction conflicts, unless there is a conflicting prepared transaction (which can be determined from fine-grained safe time)
Because the timestamps promised by MinNextTS() lie within a leader’s lease, the disjointness invariant enforces MinNextTS() promises across leaders.
If a leader wishes to advance MinNextTS() beyond the end of its leader lease, it must first extend its.
Note that smax is always advanced to the highest value in MinNextTS() to preserve disjointness.
A leader by default advances MinNextTS() values every 8 seconds.
Thus, in the absence of prepared transactions, healthy slaves in an idle Paxos group can serve reads at timestamps greater than 8 seconds old in the worst case.
A leader may also advance MinNextTS() values on demand from slaves.
We first measure Spanner’s performance with respect to replication, transactions, and availability.
We then provide some data on TrueTime behavior, and a case study of our first client, F1
Clients and zones were placed in a set of datacenters with network distance of less than 1ms.
Operations were standalone reads and writes of Spanner’s call stack.
In addition, one unmeasured round of reads was done first to warm any location caches.
For the latency experiments, clients issued sufficiently few operations so as to avoid queuing at the servers.
As the number of replicas increases, the latency stays roughly constant with less standard deviation because Paxos executes in parallel at a group’s replicas.
As the number of replicas increases, the latency to achieve a quorum becomes less sensitive to slowness at one slave replica.
For the throughput experiments, clients issued sufficiently many operations so as to saturate the servers’
Snapshot reads can execute at any up-to-date replicas, so their throughput increases almost linearly with the number of replicas.
Single-read read-only transactions only execute at leaders because timestamp assignment must happen at leaders.
Figure 5 illustrates the availability benefits of running Spanner in multiple datacenters.
It shows the results of three experiments on throughput in the presence of datacenter failure, all of which are overlaid onto the same time scale.
Killing Z1 while giving the leaders time to handoff leadership to.
As leaders get re-elected, though, the throughput of the system rises to approximately 100K reads/second because of two artifacts of our experiment: there is extra capacity in the system, and operations are queued while the leader is unavailable.
As a result, the throughput of the system rises before leveling off again at its steady-state rate.
We can also see the effect of the fact that Paxos leader leases are set to 10 seconds.
When we kill the zone, the leader-lease expiration times for the groups should be evenly distributed over the next 10 seconds.
Soon after each lease from a dead leader expires, a new leader is elected.
Approximately 10 seconds after the kill time, all of the groups have leaders and throughput has recovered.
Shorter lease times would reduce the effect of server deaths on availability, but would require greater amounts of lease-renewal network traffic.
We are in the process of designing and implementing a mechanism that will cause slaves to release Paxos leader leases upon leader failure.
This backend was originally based on a MySQL database that was manually sharded many ways.
The uncompressed dataset is tens of terabytes, which is small compared to many NoSQL instances, but was large enough to cause difficulties with sharded MySQL.
The MySQL sharding scheme assigned each customer and all related data to a fixed shard.
This layout enabled the use of indexes and complex query processing on a per-customer basis, but required some knowledge of the sharding in application business logic.
Resharding this revenue-critical database as it grew in the number of customers and their data was extremely costly.
The last resharding took over two years of intense effort, and involved coordination and testing across dozens of teams to minimize risk.
This operation was too complex to do regularly: as a result, the team had to limit growth on the MySQL database by storing some.
The F1 team chose to use Spanner for several reasons.
With MySQL master-slave replication, failover was difficult, and risked data loss and downtime.
Third, F1 requires strong transactional semantics, which made using other NoSQL systems impractical.
Application semantics requires transactions across arbitrary data, and consistent reads.
The F1 team also needed secondary indexes on their data (since Spanner does not yet provide automatic support for secondary indexes), and was able to implement their own consistent global indexes using Spanner transactions.
All application writes are now by default sent through F1 to Spanner, instead of the MySQL-based application stack.
This choice of replica sites was made to cope with outages due to potential major natural disasters, and also the choice of their frontend sites.
Anecdotally, Spanner’s automatic failover has been nearly invisible to them.
Although there have been unplanned cluster failures in the last few months, the most that the F1 team has had to do is update their database’s schema to tell Spanner where to preferentially place Paxos leaders, so as to keep them close to where their frontends moved.
Spanner’s timestamp semantics made it efficient for F1 to maintain in-memory data structures computed from the database state.
F1 maintains a logical history log of all changes, which is written into Spanner itself as part of every transaction.
F1 takes full snapshots of data at a timestamp to initialize its data structures, and then reads incremental changes to update them.
Each directory typically corresponds to a customer in the application stack above F1
The vast majority of directories (and therefore customers) consist of only 1 fragment, which means that reads and writes to those customers’ data are guaranteed to occur on only a single server.
The F1 team has only seen such behavior when they do untuned bulk data loads as transactions.
Replicas in the east-coast data centers are given higher priority in choosing Paxos leaders.
The data in the table is measured from F1 servers in those data centers.
The large standard deviation in write latencies is caused by a pretty fat tail due to lock conflicts.
The even larger standard deviation in read latencies is partially due to the fact that Paxos leaders are spread across two data centers, only one of which has machines with SSDs.
DynamoDB presents a key-value interface, and only replicates within a region.
Spanner follows Megastore in providing a semi-relational data model, and even a similar schema language.
It is layered on top of Bigtable, which imposes high communication costs.
It also does not support long-lived leaders: multiple replicas may initiate writes.
All writes from different replicas necessarily conflict in the Paxos protocol, even if they do not logically conflict: throughput collapses on a Paxos group at several writes per second.
We agree with the conclusion, but demonstrate that integrating multiple layers has its advantages: integrating concurrency control with replication reduces the cost of commit wait in Spanner, for example.
The notion of layering transactions on top of a replicated store dates at least as far back as Gifford’s dissertation [16]
Scatter [17] is a recent DHT-based key-value store that layers transactions on top of consistent replication.
Spanner focuses on providing a higher-level interface than Scatter does.
Gray and Lamport [18] describe a non-blocking commit protocol based on Paxos.
Their protocol incurs more messaging costs than twophase commit, which would aggravate the cost of commit over widely distributed groups.
Walter [36] provides a variant of snapshot isolation that works within, but not across datacenters.
In contrast, our read-only transactions provide a more natural semantics, because we support external consistency over all operations.
There has been a spate of recent work on reducing or eliminating locking overheads.
Calvin [40] eliminates concurrency control: it pre-assigns timestamps and then executes the transactions in timestamp order.
Spanner addresses the contention issue by providing support for snapshot isolation.
VoltDB [42] is a sharded in-memory database that supports master-slave replication over the wide area for disaster recovery, but not more general replication configurations.
It is an example of what has been called NewSQL, which is a marketplace push to support scalable SQL [38]
Lomet and Li [24] describe an implementation strategy for such a temporal database.
Farsite derived bounds on clock uncertainty (much looser than TrueTime’s) relative to a trusted clock reference [13]: server leases in Farsite were maintained in the same way that Spanner maintains Paxos leases.
We have shown that TrueTime lets one reason about global time across sets of Paxos state machines.
We have spent most of the last year working with the F1 team to transition Google’s advertising backend from MySQL to Spanner.
We are actively improving its monitoring and support tools, as well as tuning its performance.
In addition, we have been working on improving the functionality and performance of our backup/restore system.
We are currently implementing the Spanner schema language, automatic maintenance of secondary indices, and automatic load-based resharding.
Optimistically doing reads in parallel may be a valuable strategy to pursue, but initial experiments have indicated that the right implementation is non-trivial.
Although Spanner is scalable in the number of nodes, the node-local data structures have relatively poor performance on complex SQL queries, because they were designed for simple key-value accesses.
Algorithms and data structures from DB literature could improve singlenode performance a great deal.
Second, moving data automatically between datacenters in response to changes in client load has long been a goal of ours, but to make that goal effective, we would also need the ability to move client-application processes between datacenters in an automated, coordinated fashion.
Moving processes raises the even more difficult problem of managing resource acquisition and allocation between datacenters.
To summarize, Spanner combines and extends on ideas from two research communities: from the database community, a familiar, easy-to-use, semi-relational interface, transactions, and an SQL-based query language; from the systems community, scalability, automatic sharding, fault tolerance, consistent replication, external consistency, and wide-area distribution.
Since Spanner’s inception, we have taken more than 5 years to iterate to the current design and implementation.
Part of this long iteration phase was due to a slow realization that Spanner should do more than tackle the problem of a globallyreplicated namespace, and should also focus on database features that Bigtable was missing.
One aspect of our design stands out: the linchpin of Spanner’s feature set is TrueTime.
We have shown that reifying clock uncertainty in the time API makes it possible to build distributed systems with much stronger time semantics.
In addition, as the underlying system enforces tighter bounds on clock uncertainty, the overhead of the stronger semantics decreases.
As a community, we should no longer depend on loosely synchronized clocks and weak time APIs in designing distributed algorithms.
We have built upon the work of the Bigtable and Megastore teams.
The F1 team, and Jeff Shute in particular, worked closely with us in developing our data model and helped immensely in tracking down performance and correctness bugs.
HadoopDB: an architectural hybrid of MapReduce and DBMS technologies for analytical workloads”
The end of an architectural era: (it’s time for a complete rewrite)”
The simplest means to ensure the disjointness of Paxosleader-lease intervals would be for a leader to issue a synchronous Paxos write of the lease interval, whenever it would be extended.
A subsequent leader would read the interval and wait until that interval has passed.
TrueTime can be used to ensure disjointness without these extra log writes.
