No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
About the Vocabulary The 600 words in each book of this series along with the additional target words presented in the appendices included in the first three books of the series are the most useful words in English.
They were found by analysis of a collection of English course books from various levels in the primary, secondary and tertiary school systems.
The words included in this series were chosen because they occurred many times in different levels of these materials.
Because of the way that they were chosen, these words have the following characteristics:
No matter what English course you are studying, the words in these books will be of value to you.
This means that the effort in learning the words is well repaid by the number of times learners have a chance to encounter or use them.
These books as a whole cover a large proportion of the words in any spoken or written text.
They also cover at least 90% of the words in conversation.
About the Books The activities in these books are specially designed to make use of important learning conditions.
Firstly, the words are introduced using sentence definitions and an example sentence.
The activities that follow in the units encourage learners to recall the meanings and forms of the words.
Some activities also make the learners think about the meaning of the words in the context of a sentence—a sentence different from the sentences that occurred in the introduction of the words.
Moreover, each unit ends with a story containing the target words.
While reading the story, the learners have to recall the meanings of the words and suit them to the context of the story.
Such activities help learners develop a better understanding of a common meaning for a given word which fits the different uses.
Illustrations for each target word are provided to help learners visualize the word as it is being used in the example sentence.
These word/image associations aim to help students grasp the meaning of the word as well as recall the word later.
It should be noted that words have more than one grammatical category.
However, this series focuses on the word’s most common form.
This is mentioned to remind learners that just because a word is labeled and utilized as a noun in this series does not mean that it can never be used in another form such as an adjective.
This series has simply focused on the word in the form that it is most likely to be expressed.
Supporting Learning with Outside Activities A well-balanced language course provides four major opportunities for learning: learning through input, learning through output, deliberate learning, and fluency development.
The highly structured activities in these books support all four types of learning opportunities.
In addition, learning can further be supported through the following activities:
Have students create vocabulary cards with one word from the unit on one side of the card and the translation of the word in the student’s first language on the other side.
Students should use the cards for study in free moments during the day.
Over several weeks, students will find that quick repeated studying for brief periods of time is more effective than studying for hours at one sitting.
Reading such books provides both enjoyment as well as meaning-focused input which will help the words stick in students’ memory.
Practice reading fluency to promote faster recall of word meaning for both sight recognition and usage.
Compass Publishing’s Reading for Speed and Fluency is a good resource for reading fluency material.
Reinforcement of the high-frequency vocabulary presented in this series is important across all the four language skills.
His specialist interests are language teaching methodology and vocabulary learning.
To agree is to say “yes” or to think the same way.
When someone is angry, they may want to speak loudly or fight.
She didn’t do her homework, so her father is angry.
To hide is to try not to let others see you.
A moment is a second or a very short time.
I was only a few moments late for the meeting.
A trick is something you do to fool another person.
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
When a plane arrives, it leaves the ground and goes into the sky.
At noon, the sun is near the bottom of the sky.
If I break my brother’s bike, he will be angry.
At night, your parents may say, “Hide your eyes and go to sleep.” b.
Heavy things will go down to the bottom of the ocean.
It is cruel to keep a dog in a small cage all day.
Your mother will be angry when you get good grades in school.
It is a good idea to arrive early for class.
A cruel person will try to help others at all times.
You can use a gun to hunt in the forest.
Every day, he killed and ate a lot of animals.
The other animals were afraid the lion would kill them all.
If you promise to eat only one animal each day, then one of us will come to you every day.
The plan sounded well thought-out to the lion, so he agreed, but he also said, “ If you don’t come every day, I promise to kill all of you the next day!”
Each day after that, one animal went to the lion so that the lion could eat it.
Finally, it was the rabbit’s turn to go to the lion.
The rabbit went very slowly that day, so the lion was angry when the rabbit finally arrived.
The lion angrily asked the rabbit, “Why are you late?”
The rabbit replied, “ I will be happy to show you where he lives.”
The rabbit led the lion to an old well in the middle of the forest.
The well was very deep with water at the bottom.
When the lion looked in the well, he could see his own face in-the water.
How to be safe when you hunt in the forest.
What did all the animals say to the lion? a.
They said that the rabbit would be there in a moment.
They said that they would allow him to eat one of them a day.
They said that they would hide at the bottom of the well.
Why did the rabbit take the lion to the well in the middle of the forest? a.
So a lot of animals could see the rabbit walking with the lion b.
So the other animals would be afraid of the rabbit.
Which of the following is true at the end of the story? a.
The lion attacked another lion, and they both got hurt.
The lion cannot reply to the rabbit, so the rabbit wins.
The lion is pleased by the rabbit’s words, so it does not eat the rabbit.
What did the lion see when it looked in the well?
An adventure is a fun or exciting thing that you do.
When a person is nervous, they think something bad will happen.
A project is a type of work that you do for school ora job.
His afternoon work project was to paint the room green.
My boss shouted at me because I was late for work.
To smell something means to use your nose to sense it.
I’m not having fun, so let’s go on an exciting trip, adven________
O’Malley asked me to get close to the desk and write my name, app__________
I won’t tell anyone your thing that other people don’t know, se________
I have to finish my special job before I can go home.
The Laboratory Mia’s father had a laboratory, but she had no idea what was in it.
She knew that he used it to do projects for work.
She stopped and thought, “ I wonder what crazy experiment he is doing now.” Suddenly, she heard a loud noise.
The noise scared her, so she walked quickly back to her room.
The next night, her friend Liz came to her house.
When Liz arrived, Mia told her about the night before.
They waited until Mia’s father left the laboratory to eat dinner.
It was even worse than the one Mia heard the night before.
What if a monster was going to kill them? Mia had to do something.
Mia’s father ran into the room and turned on the lights.
I wanted to give it to you then, but you.
A girl who gets nervous about what’s in a laboratory d.
A doll to give to Mia for her birthday b.
We used a chart to see how we had improved.
To describe is to say or write what someone or something is like.
They described their tree as colorful with gold ribbon and a star.
Going skiing last winter was the most fun I’ve ever had.
A library is a place where you go to read books.
To solve something is to find an answer to it.
The universe is the known or supposed objects in space.
The universe is so large that it cannot be measured.
Exercise 3 Choose the word that is a better fit for each sentence.
The Report Lee sat among the books at the library and thought about his group project.
They had to turn it in soon, but he hadn’t even started his part! Jack and Claire.
They were also very smart, and Lee didn’t want them to get a bad grade.
He wrote a lot of very good sentences and described things with great adjectives.
Now, Lee needed to do his part of the project.
He put his head down on the table and said, “ I wish I could see a planet, instead of having to read about it!”
Lee was pulled from his chair, through the roof, and right into a strange ship! “Hello, kid,” said an alien.
Instead of a bad grade, his group would have the best project ever!
On the way back, he helped Lee make a model of the planet Mars.
A boy who wants to write instead of draw d.
Where the best place is to view the stars d.
What can you suppose is true of the group’s report? a.
What did the alien want to do to help Lee? a.
When a thing is appropriate, it is right or normal.
It’s appropriate to wear a suit when you go to the office.
To behave is to act in a particular way, especially to be good.
If you expect something to happen, you believe it will happen.
The men spoke about issues that were important to the people.
To punish means to make someone suffer for breaking the rules or laws.
To punish me, my teacher had me stand in the corner.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The story about the police dog got to many people in town, spr______
I was happy to sit and listen to music all night, con________
The house will move back and forth if a strong wind blows, sh______
I waited for the monster to come out of the cave, ex____________
I didn’t want to talk to my sister, so I staved away from her.
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
The team members asked Kate to represent them at the dinner.
I was content to stay at home by the warm fire.
I avoided my friend because she had laughed at me.
At first I was nervous, but then I started to feel calm.
I wanted to avoid food, so I bought a sandwich.
It was not an appropriate way for a dog to behave.
His friends in the village always expected the dog to bite them.
None of the people wanted to go to John’s house.
John tried to instruct the dog to behave, but it never worked.
He tried to be patient and teach the dog to be calm.
John’s friend came to talk to him about the issue.
He liked the song the bell played when he walked.
One day, John’s dog strolled through the village and met some other dogs.
It tells them where you are so they can avoid you.
You see, being popular isn’t something positive when it’s for the wrong reason.
Why did the issue with the dog bother John? a.
What did John do to stop the dog’s bad habit? a.
If you are aware of something, you know about it.
She stood under her umbrella as the rain continued to fall.
I made an error on my report, so my boss was angry.
I will likely stay at home and watch TV tonight.
My brother and his family reside in a lovely house on the beach.
To roll is to move by turning over and over.
You must roll the ball into the pins when you bowl.
Since is used to talk about a past event still happening now.
The moon and stars were visible in the night sky.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Sorry I can’t come; I’m feeling discomfort in my body.
He’s going to rest instead of going to the movie.
The man walked through a large area of land, f.
A jackal is a wild dog with a big black back.
But how did the jackal get his black back? This was how it happened.
You will likely get me home more quickly.” Then she requested, “Will you carry me home? If you do, I’ll give you a gift.
So when the sun child was looking at the sky, not aware of the jackal’s next plan, he jumped into a field of flowers.
But the sun child left a mark on the jackal’s back, a visible.
Ever since his experience with the sun child, the jackal has had a black back.
The sun child became aware of the jackal’s black back.
The sun child has stayed upon the jackal’s back since then.
My sister and I have to find a better way to face our differences.
Out of all my pets, the dog is my favorite.
I was happy to return home to my mom after school.
The weather is the condition of the air: hot, rainy, windy, etc.
To be wise is to use experience and intelligence to make good choices.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Sam was happy to go back to his house, re n.
He studies what the condition of the air is like.
I have to deal with my rising credit card bill, f ______
Choose the word that is a better fit for each sentence.
The Friendly Ghost A nice woman lived by a large river.
She loved her community, and everyone in the community loved her.
She lived a very long time and became very wise.
She was dead, but every night she returned to her community.
She wanted to help children and not to cause them fright.
Children were afraid of her, but the ghost was a good one.
One night, some children and a dog were playing by the river.
They needed to go north, but they didn’t know which direction it was.
When the moon came out, they saw a ghost by the river.
She yelled again, “Go away!” The children became very upset.
The children knew they had a choice: they could escape, or they could stay and face this scary individual in the dark.
The ghost had helped the children survive! She had saved them from the.
How a wise pet helps children escape a ghost c.
Why an individual has a job in the north d.
What was true of the children in the story? a.
To allow something to happen means to let it happen.
Having a ticket will allow you to enter the show.
When someone or something is beside you, they are next to you.
It was a challenge to climb to the top of the mountain.
He claimed to know why the country’s laws were weak.
The condition of someone or something is the state that they are in.
A difference is a way that something is not like other things.
The biggest difference between the birds is the color of their feathers.
To protect someone is to stop them from getting hurt.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
You should say it’s true that you never lie, cl.
The food was cut into smaller parts so we could all eat.
Two of the princes stood waiting outside the king’s room.
When I’m king,” Theseus told Pelias, “ I’ll let you contribute to the defense of our country.
What did the king need to protect the kingdom from? a.
What was probably true of Jason in the story? a.
The challenge of being king was too much for him.
What was the difference between Jason and his brothers? a.
To arrange things is to put them in the right place.
Please arrange the bowling pins in order so we can play.
To encourage someone is to make them want to do something.
My football coach will encourage us when we are losing.
If someone or something is familiar to you, you know them well.
To hang something is to keep it above the ground.
Success is doing something well that you choose to do.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
He has an idea of how the machine works, the______
My teacher will make me want to get good grades, enc____________
It is difficult to keep from falling when you stand on one foot, ba__________
Her routine of exercising after work is common for many people.
Do you ever wonder where the moon and the sun came from? The Inuit people of Alaska have a theory.
But the girl worked hard, and soon she had success.
Suddenly, the lights were turned off! Someone grabbed her hair and tore her clothes.
She wanted to encourage the person to grab it again.
She went to the bathroom again, and it was the same pattern.
She knew there was only a single person with a black hand.
They both carried fire so they could see in the dark.
When the girl’s fire went out, she hung in the sky.
She became the moon, and her brother became the sun.
A theory of how the moon and the sun were made c.
Why it is necessary for the moon to balance in the sky.
Why does the girl encourage someone to grab her hair? a.
She wants to become huge and hang in the sky.
What was true of the boy in the story? a.
He accepted the invitation when his sister proposed a party.
The beach is a sandy or rocky place by the ocean.
Perhaps is used when you say that something could happen.
Still is used when you say that a situation keeps going on.
A taste is the flavor something makes in your mouth.
I am scared of some animals that live in the.
If you______________ the light, we won’t be able to see at night.
The Starfish Last summer I took a trip to an island.
I discovered pretty things and enjoyed the taste of new foods.
One evening I took a pleasant walk by the ocean.
When the waves came in, many starfish* fell on the beach.
Some starfish went back into the water, and they were safe.
They would die if they did not get into the water.
It made me sad, but I knew I could not fix the problem.
I stepped very carefully so I did not damage them.
She sat back against a rock and thought for a.
Then she picked up a starfish and threw it into the water.
Then she picked up a very big starfish and said, “But I can save this one.” And then she smiled and threw the starfish as far as she could into the ocean.
What does the man think is NOT good about the island? a.
What does the girl think the man can perhaps do? a.
Being able to fly is a good benefit to birds.
If you are certain about something, you know it is true.
If something is essential, it is very important and necessary.
It is essential to have oxygen when you scuba dive.
If something is primary, it is the most important thing.
A tail is a part of an animal’s body, sticking out from its rear or back.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The good thing about being old is that you know many things, bene______
I am sure that she will come to his party, cer________
I like to stay at home on the weekends, r__________
His part that comes out of his rear was shaking because he was happy, t.
The______________ of waking up early is being at work on time.
She and her best friend hate to be in_______________ classrooms.
I return to the site of my birth ___ b.
Also, since he had so many eyes, he was very good at guarding things.
While sleeping, he only rested a few eyes at a time.
The most essential part of his job was to keep the cow alone.
It had to be kept separate from all the other cows and far away from people.
He asked the man to play a beautiful song for Argos.
Even today, Argos’ image remains there, above the site where all his problems began.
How the image of a peacock in the sky came about d.
He was able to sleep instead of focusing on it.
Why did Zeus turn Argos into a group of stars? a.
He wanted Argos to see the site of his trouble.
He wanted to make Argos remain in the sky forever.
To see the effects of music on the cow d.
A berry is a small round fruit that grows on certain plants and trees.
The creature we saw today was either a dolphin or a porpoise.
Either is used with “or” to say there are two or more possibilities.
You can choose to be either white or black when you play chess.
Joe had a strange look on his face after he saw what happened.
He is always full of energy when he wakes in the morning.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
I like to use my time taking long walks in the forest.
He loved to travel in his boat to many islands, sa____
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
She did not know my name, so I had to myself.
I had to make a about which book I wanted to buy.
Her mother, the queen, however, was not as beautiful as the princess.
The queen felt bad that she was not the most beautiful woman in the kingdom anymore.
She dreamed about a man with brown hair and brown eyes.
It looked like a man, but he was hairy and green.
He had horns on his head and a pig’s nose.
They had a very good day filled with nice conversations.
She gave Henry a kiss right on his pig nose.
As soon as she kissed Henry, he began to change.
Why a queen had a conversation with a princess c.
How a princess met a creature in a forest d.
Which of the following is NOT true in the story? a.
Henry said he was going to sail away on a ship.
What did the queen want to happen to the princess? a.
An animal would kill the princess if she was left on the ground.
Rose and a creature would collect either berries or fruits.
Which of the following is true at the end of the story? a.
If someone is alone, they are not with another person.
An apartment is a set of rooms in a building where people live.
An article is a story in a newspaper or magazine.
Did you read the article in the newspaper about the soccer game?
A meal is a time when food is eaten like breakfast, lunch, or dinner.
Breakfast is my favorite meal because I enjoy breakfast foods.
One method to remember things is to tie a string around your finger.
I don’t have much space for things in my small house.
A symbol is a thing that stands for something else.
This symbol tells us that we cannot smoke in this area.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
If you make a profit, you have more money than you did before.
If you have professional training, you can’t do a difficult job.
If something is a symbol, it stands for something else.
You can use stairs to go up inside a building.
Since she is a lawyer, people call my wife an artist.
If you compare two things, you say how they are different.
If you judge something, you know if it is good or bad.
You must have space to add more things to a room.
The Crazy Artist Frenhoferwas the best artist in the world.
But he kept working on the same painting for many years.
He was very happy and invited other artists to see it.
He wanted them to judge it and compare it to other paintings.
Everyone was very excited as they went up the stairs to his apartment.
Frenhofer was excited to show his painting, and the artists were excited to see it.
But after some time, many people began to like his painting.
Frenhofer’s painting reminded everyone that just because something was new didn’t mean that it was bad.
He also helped them to realize that sometimes it takes people a little time to understand great things.
A painter whose neighbors judge his art as poor quality b.
An artist who teaches art classes in his apartment c.
Why does Frenhofer want the artists to see his painting? a.
He wants to sell it to them for a profit.
It is alone in the space used for art classes.
How do the artists feel as they go up the stairs?
A cell is a small room where a person is locked in.
The man was going to jump into the hole in the ice.
Long ago, a lord was a man in charge of a town.
I owed him twenty dollars, so I paid him back.
We had to work together to raise the last piece.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
If I get the answers__________ , I will pass the test.
Choose the word that is a better fit for each sentence.
Arthur was a responsible farmer, and Maria was a nice lady.
One structure caught fire, and most of the animals ran away.
So Arthur and Maria had to bring in their crops without an animal’s help.
Arthur asked if the lord could wait until he brought in his crops.
If you don’t, I will increase the money you have to pay.
So Arthur and Maria worked until there was blood on their hands.
They finished four lines of corn and went to bed.
But the next morning, eight lines were finished! “Maria, didn’t we stop in this spot here?” Arthur asked.
But in the morning, ten lines were done! Each day they did a lot of work.
Each night, someone else did an equal amount of work.
The cats were dancing in the field and eating corn! Now Arthur knew what had happened.
The cats had worked at night! After that, Arthur was very nice to his cats and fed them lots of corn.
What is true of the cats in the story? a.
What sight did Maria and Arthur see in the morning? a.
When will the lord increase the money that Arthur has to pay?
I did some practice questions for the math exam on the board.
An example of something is a thing that is typical of it.
A limit is the largest or smallest amount of something that you allow.
My mother put a limit on how much I could use the phone.
Magical describes a quality that makes someone or something special.
An outline is the plan for a story or essay.
I only needed a single sheet of paper to do my homework.
If someone or something is silly, they show a lack of thought.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
He got a low score on the science test, ex____
The evening was filled with special things that made it different, ma__________
He loves to have the best things that are new to the world, tech____________
The writer is good at making sentences about what someone looks like, de _
She was on the basketball team, but she didn’t like sports.
One example from the book was about a boy who could control people.
In one scene, he made his friends tell funny jokes.
During one exam, she made her friend tell silly jokes.
After school, Sarah did not make a direct trip home.
Her basketball coach was about to walk in front of a bus.
So, she put a limit on how she used her power.
She did not want to do bad things with it.
A girl who gets a novel about technology in the mail b.
A man who takes a direct trip to the local store d.
To excite someone means to make them happy and interested.
My boss always yells at me when I make a mistake.
A prize is something of value that is given to the winner.
I won a prize for getting the best grade on my science test.
Yet is used to say something has not happened up to now.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
I had to walk to the other side of the school to get to my next class.
Brad chose not to give an answer when I asked about his weekend.
Sarah ran around the park to get ready for the contest where people run against each other.
Renee knew there was a chance of something bad happening when she went swimming in the ocean.
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
Because he left work early, Carl had an opportunity to go to the concert.
Angela felt fear when she got a good grade on her test.
Billy feels fear when he has to talk in front of people.
The Big Race A dog saw a group of animals across the road.
The rabbit and the turtle stood next to each other.
The dog wondered why the turtle agreed to run against the rabbit.
He saw that the turtle was far behind him and was breathing quickly because he was so tired.
A minute later, the rabbit said, “ I’m winning, so I’ll take a rest.” He sat and began to consume some grass.
But there was no risk of him losing the race.
All of the animals were yelling and looking at the field.
What did the duck do for the other animals? a.
Why did the dog think the turtle had no opportunity to win the race? a.
What did the rabbit do after he woke up? a.
What did the rabbit see to make him feel fear?
A clue is a fact or object that helps solve a mystery or crime.
A concert is an event where you listen to people play music.
Flat describes something that is level and smooth with no curved parts -* My parents bought a new flat screen TV over the weekend.
If something is original, it is the first one of that thing.
A process is the steps to take to do something.
A theater is a building where you watch plays, shows, and movies.
One of the most important things to some people is wealth.
Exercise 3 Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
This morning, I walked down the hall to the field.
On a spring Saturday, he wanted to do something fun! He asked his friend Jeff to go to the movie theater.
I don’t know, but maybe! There are clues to it in this book.
The first clue was to find a flat tree underground.
Because there are clues to it in a book b.
Where will the boys probably go at the end of the story? a.
To disappear means to go away or not be seen.
The top of the building is disappearing in the clouds.
If you talk about something else, you talk about something different.
If someone or something is lone, they are the only one of that kind.
Don’t throw it in the trash without using all of it.
The rabbit will go away if you get too close, dis____________
He asked if I liked new movies or old movies, wh__________
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
Do you__________ the thought that went into the gifts you got?
The Race for Water There was a town next to a river.
It said, “ If you waste water, I will take it away from you.” But the people didn’t listen.
When the season changed from spring to summer, the clouds disappeared.
The bright sun was hot and made the river dry.
He said, “ If I get to the top of that hill before your rain can form puddles, you must fill our river.”
When it rained on the hill, the water went down.
When the boy reached the top of the hill, the river was full.
It was the highest level the river had ever been at before.
He beat the rain to the top of the hill.
What was the last thing the Sky did in the story? a.
It raced a lone boy to the top of the hill.
What did the boy say when he reached the top of the hill?
To depend on someone or something is to need them.
To indicate means to show, point or make something clear.
He pointed to his eyes to indicate where he had hurt himself.
An item is a thing that you buy or sell.
To recommend something is to say that someone should do it.
A tool is something that helps you do a task.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The company’s things that it makes are very useful in the kitchen.
Why don’t you present her a fair price for her house? of.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
When I opened them, I saw a great meal on a.
There was even a vase full of flowers that he had.
A little red chicken had a store in a small town.
She sold many different items to people in the town.
He saw the sign that indicated where the chicken’s store was located.
He wanted to purchase bread, but the chicken’s store was almost empty.
Later, the little red chicken saw the cat in a crowd.
She used a stone to pound the wheat to get it ready.
The cat came and saw the bread on a dish.
But the little red chicken did not want to ** sell her bread.
When it grows big, you can gather it and make your own bread.
Why a cat’s store did not have any items d.
What did the cat do when the chicken asked him to help make the bread? a.
He said that he would gather all the things needed to make the bread.
What did the cat do when he saw the fresh bread? a.
He tried to buy some of it for a price.
He brought a crowd of friends with him to eat.
What did the little red chicken recommend the cat to do to have some bread?
To bother is to make the effort to do something.
The conclusion of something is the final part of it.
At the conclusion of the race, the spectators cheered for the winner.
He wants to explore the world and see new things.
If something is foreign, it is from a different country.
Putting an innocent person in jail is an act of injustice.
A lawyer works with the law and represents people in court.
The lawyer left the courthouse after the judge made her decision.
A speech is something said to a group of people.
If you go toward something, you go closer to it.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
Go__________ the river, but stop before you get in the water!
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
He gave a talk to a group of people at the meeting, spe______
Did anyone make the effort to do their homework? bo________
The chair is made of the material trees are made of.
The group of workers helped him with his work, s________
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
Everyone will have to drink a cup of milk at lunch.
She said she had no 6_____________ that we would all feel better.
He made a lot of money, but many people didn’t like him.
In fact, they were glad when he got into trouble.
He mentioned his plan to the captain of a ship.
The captain felt bad for Simon and said, “ I will take you to foreign countries.” They left the next day.
Near the conclusion of their international trip, the weather turned bad.
He had trouble sometimes, but he always found a way to fix the problem.
Finally, people on a ship saw Simon on the island.
He liked his new, simple life more than his old life.
How the captain of a ship explored foreign places b.
How a lawyer stayed alive alone on an island c.
Why a man and a woman went on an international trip d.
Why it is a good policy to worry about social problems.
To advise someone is to tell them what to do.
If something happens already, it happens before a certain time.
If something is basic, it is very simple or easy.
I ate a bit of chocolate before I went to bed.
To lie is to say or write something untrue to deceive someone.
An opinion is a thought about a person or a thing.
To regard someone or something is to think of them in a certain way.
A war is a big fight between two groups of people.
If something is worth an amount of money, it costs that amount.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
It is sad when two countries start a ___________with each other.
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
If a man has extra socks, he does not have enough.
If a woman considers leaving, she doesn’t want to go.
If a bike is worth $50, it costs much less.
When a teacher advises her students, she asks them what they want to do.
If a boy considers studying, he is thinking about doing it.
If a girl brings extra paper, she has more than she needs.
When you advise your friend, you tell him what to do.
The Seven Cities of Gold Many years ago, a Spanish officer named Coronado heard the story of seven.
Were the cities real? Coronado never considered asking his friends.
Coronado thought to himself, “The things in these cities must be worth a lot of money.” So he went to find the Seven Cities of Gold.
He took along three hundred men, many horses, and extra food.
That night, the people of the cities entertained Coronado and his men and served them food.
Why was Coronado unhappy when he saw the cities? a.
What did the people of the cities advise Coronado to do? a.
What did Coronodo do when he thought he saw a bit of gold on the houses?
A career is a job that you do for a large part of your life.
He was in the hospitality business for most of his career.
Two guards greeted me as I entered the front door.
A hero is a brave person who does things to help others.
To children, the man in the blue and red costume was a real hero.
An operation is when a doctor replaces or removes something in the body.
Though is used when the second idea makes the first seem surprising.
Fill in the blanks with the right words from the word bank.
I didn’t know the name of the movie, so I told the 2___________what it was about.
She went to the shelf and brought it to me.
He arrived on time, but Sarah won’t be here___________ a.
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
Because the base of the lamp was broken, it could not stand up.
I decided to leave early so that I could be late.
I will leave early in the morning to catch my plane.
My friends and I decided to throw an operation for my sister.
Though I was rich, I bought a lot of cars.
He never used his brain when he faced problems! b.
She was there because she felt a lot of pain.
The doctors located a problem at the base of her brain.
I knew she was special, even before she got better.
When I entered Katy’s room, she was not in her bed.
She was in a chair next to Tommy, a little boy.
Though Katy did not feel well, she was playing with Tommy and his toys.
It took a lot of effort for her just to sit in the chair.
But she played with Tommy because it made him happy.
Katy was always smiling and never appeared to be in pain.
Later, she gave it to one of the older patients.
Another day she went outside to get flowers for another sick little girl.
The doctors hurried to fix the problem in Katy’s brain.
The operation was successful! The doctors informed the hospital staff of the good news.
She got better and was able to leave the hospital a month later.
Even after she got well, she still came to the hospital.
She is a hero to me and everyone else at the hospital.
A little girl who wants a career as a nurse d.
She does good things, even though she is in pain.
She has a problem at the base of her brain.
Which of the following is true at the end of the story? a.
Katy feels excellent but goes back to the hospital to see other patients.
How did the nurse know Katy did not feel well? a.
Katy had to make an effort just to sit in a chair.
This is the actual sword that the King owned, not a fake one.
I wanted to comfort my friend after I heard the bad news.
A mystery is something that is difficult to understand or explain.
The path on the map was a complete mystery to me.
If A is the opposite of B, A is completely different from B.
A plate is a flat round thing that you put food on.
I put my plate down so I could put some food on it.
A reward is something given in exchange for good behavior or work.
A thief is someone who quietly takes things that do not belong to them.
A thief broke into our home and took my mother's jewelry.
He was given a reward for his poor work performance.
And why haven’t the police stopped him yet? It’s a mystery.
She left her car and opened the gate to the house.
She wanted the reward! She did the opposite of what Jim told herto do.
They were eating her food! They looked thin and scared.
She tried to comfort the dogs with another plate of food.
Why did Jenny decide to run after the thief? a.
He wrote a story that included a message from the police.
How did Jenny act when she heard the noise? a.
She ran through the gate to get away from it.
She set the food on a table and ran to her car.
What did the police say to do if something strange occured?
The chart shows how his production has lowered over the year.
A member is a person who is part of a group.
If something is mental, it has to do with your mind.
A passenger is a person who rides in a car, train, or airplane.
To shoot is to fire something like a bullet at someone or something.
The hunter raised his gun to shoot at the target.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
I need to find the other sock that is the same as this one.
William wanted to go forward, but a wall stopped him.
Clara is a person in a group of the running club, me________
He was a person taking a ride on the ship, p a_________________
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
I was behind the winner, so I won the race!
The Camp Stacie wanted to stay at a nice hotel for vacation.
For breakfast, Stacie liked fresh juice and chocolate milk, but she got water at the camp.
In the afternoon she wanted to write poems, but she had to swim.
They learned how to be safe passengers on a boat.
Each team had to try to remove the other team’s flag from a pole.
Stacie took a water gun and looked for somewhere to hide.
She walked into the forest and saw a red team player coming.
Stacie hid behind a tree and then jumped out and shot the other player.
Several minutes after advancing further, Stacie saw the red flag.
Then she lowered the flag and ran back to her team.
Because of her personality, what would Stacie likely NOT want to do? a.
Instead of camp, where did Stacie want to be? a.
What did Stacie start to like about the camp? a.
A jig-saw puzzle can be complex because it has so many pieces.
Finishing high school was a major event in his life.
To exercise is to run or play sports so that you can be healthy.
If something fits, it is small enough orthe right size to go there.
A guide is someone who shows you where to go.
It is probable that you will get a good grade if you study for the test.
I hope they will do in public a funny play, pe____________
Is there a wav to get from one place to another in the city?
Her effort to make someone do something made Brad change his mind.
A Strong Friendship Tim was the strongest man in the town.
He did this to show everyone how strong he was.
Jack was a movie critic and the smartest man in town.
The people said, “This is a task for a strong man.” Tim was under pressure to save them.
But Jack wanted to be the hero, so they both went.
Tim said, “You can’t help because of your lack of strength.”
Because Tim was so big and strong, he almost couldn’t fit inside.
They walked until there was a block of ice in their way.
In town, people saw Jack with the food and cheered.
Medicine is something you take to feel better or treat an illness.
The green mix we made in science class spilled onto the table.
If something is wide, it is large from side to side.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
I offered her a of choices from one to ten.
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
We put the trash outside so it could be taken away.
We ate chicken once, so now it is a tradition.
This factory produced a lot of trash and put it in a river.
People populated the area by the river and drank its water.
Many of them needed medicine and made regular visits to doctors.
It showed ways to pick up trash and why it’s important to do this.
It said people can make a difference to their environment.
The video’s important features made Joe associate trash with hurting people.
One instance of these problems was the trash in the pond.
Different people helped each time, but Joe was always there.
In that period of time, Joe saw a range of results.
When did the boy decide to clean the park? a.
After he saw a video about a factory harming a river with its trash b.
After he saw a range of people cleaning it d.
Why did the people in the video get sick? a.
Why was it easy to pick up the trash? a.
The people had a good mix of tools to use.
What did the features of the video make Joe do?
Along means to move from one part of a road, river, etc.
Walk along this tunnel for ten minutes, and you’ll see a door on the left.
His work got the attention of two of his co-workers.
To drop is to fall or allow something to fall.
In the final part of the film, the man and the woman got married.
Neither the pass on the left nor the pass on the right will lead us home.
If something is physical, it is related to your body and not your mind.
To prove something is to show that it is true.
To react is to act in a certain way because of something that happened.
If something is situated somewhere, it is in that place.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
How did Clare act when you told her about the party? re______
In this group of people, wearing hats is common, soc________
I invited Jane and Lisa to my house, but not Jane or Lisa could come, nei________
Watch me, and I will show you that I can do it.
If you want to win the race, you need to a.
He said that I should play sports, so I _ a.
You’re lighter.” “Neither you nor your son should ride it.
But there they attracted the attention of some teenage boys.
What does this story teach us? We cannot please everyone in our society.
The town was situated further away than he had thought.
It didn’t want to go in the direction of the river.
It reacted badly to a group of teenage boys’ teasing.
What did the teenage boys do when they saw Archie, Tom, and the donkey?
Bite is the act of using your teeth to cut and tear into something.
The boy took a big bite out of his hamburger.
A deal is an agreement that you have with another person.
I made a deal with the other company to give us some money.
The desert is an area of land without many plants or water.
Hunger is the feeling that you get when you need to eat.
After playing all day long, he was filled with hunger.
To imagine something is to think of it in your mind.
I went on a journey across the country with my parents.
Rather is used when you want to do one thing but not the other.
I would rather have the red one than the blue one.
A tour is a short trip in which you see many sights.
If something has value, it is worth a lot of money.
Try to imagine what your future husband or wife will look like.
Have you studied Spanish? I’m a little worried about taking the class.
Exercise 3 Choose the word that is a better fit for each sentence.
If a bug got into his web, he would examine it.
If the bug’s answer was correct, he let it go.
One day, a small bird on a journey flew into the spider’s web.
It was so big! But his hunger was too great.
He said to the bird, “ If you cannot give me a specific answer, I will eat you.”
She had used all her energy trying to get out of the web.
And a spider’s bite can be very effective in killing animals.
If your answer is right, I will let you go.
It must be something of great value.” The bird said, “You can pick anything you want to eat.
Where can you take a trip to the coast, the desert, and the mountains at the.
The bird asked, “Does this place have earthquakes?” But the spider did not.
The answer is Hawaii! Now you must find some bugs.
Why does the bird make a deal instead of flying away? a.
She is too tired from trying to get out of the web.
What will be the bird’s gift to the spider? a.
What is the spider’s response to the bird’s answer? a.
What is the first thing the spider does when a bug gets into his web?
A band is a group of people who play music.
A driveway is a short private road that leads to a person’s home.
A list is a record of information printed with an item on each line.
The magician used magic to pull a rabbit out of his hat.
A message is a set of words that you send to someone.
You use within to say that something is inside another thing.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
Ifyou don’t understand the class, you should askyour___ for help.
I made a ______________of things I want for my birthday.
Have you ever heard this_____________ ? I really like its music.
Do you have time in your_____________ to come over this week?
If I am not home when you call, just leave a ______________
Ifyou wake up early, you don’t need to______________to get to school.
Exercise 3 Check (V) the one that suits the blank naturally.
Cody liked his new town, but he missed his grandparents.
His dad said, “Yes, we could even have a band play!”
On the day of the party, Cody woke up and rushed to get ready.
He started to check his list of things to do.
He was so excited! But then he noticed something terrible.
There was snow on the ground and lots of it! “Dad!” he yelled.
Dad said, “We’ll move the stage inside.” It barely fit within the garage because there were some boxes and garbage there.
But when they finished, they got a call from the band.
They did not want to come in the snow storm.
Dad said, “Let’s get someone to perform magic.” But no one would come because of the snow.
It was his favorite type, a sundae with whipped cream on top.
He will have to rush to get ready for the party.
A competition is a contest to see who is the best at something.
Importance means the quality or condition of being needed or valued.
Progress is the act of getting closer to doing or finishing something.
Somehow means in a way or by some means which is not known.
He somehow had to find a way to reach the life preserver.
To vote is to officially choose between two or more things.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
I want to be in the___________to show that I am the best.
The president of Darkland was a pig—a very bad pig.
He was rich, and he had a lot of strength.
But he was mean to all the animals in Darkland.
He kept all of the world’s light in a bag.
The audience watched and then voted for the animal with the most knowledge.
The next morning, Raven ate breakfast and then left his home.
He flew by the pig and found the soft bag.
How a big, tall bird gave light to the world b.
A rich president who helped the world stay cool c.
To let the people assign a job to Raven b.
To bring an audience to see his big house c.
He used his strength to fight the president for it.
He used his knowledge of the area to find it.
He made a sound like a baby to make the pig open the door.
If something is ahead of something else, it is in front of it.
A belief is a strong feeling that something is correct or true.
A preacher or priest should have a strong belief in God.
The center of a dart board is the most important spot.
If something is common, it happens often or there is much of it.
It is common for snow to fall in the winter.
An idiom is a phrase with a meaning different from its words.
The idiom “when pigs fly” means that something will never happen.
A master is a person who is very good at something.
It is not proper to throw your garbage on the road.
To scan something is to look at it very carefully.
The green section of the graph is the most important part.
Should we go straight ahead to get to your house? a.
Did he put the table in the center of the room? a.
But where did this idiom start? It came from a section of England.
One day, a man went to the section’s center to sell things.
He gave her a closed bag and said, “Here’s your pig.” He then left very quickly.
A cat was inside! “He tricked me! That isn’t proper,” she said.
Beth saw him and the memory of the cat came back.
Someone said, “We need an independent and fair person to decide that.” They went to the judge.
The judge asked, “ Is there evidence? Can you demonstrate how he did it?”
She opened it and let a cat out of the bag.
They learned the man’s secret, and he went to jail.
That’s how the idiom “ let the cat out of the bag” came to mean to tell a secret.
When did the memory of the cat come back to Beth?
English offers perhaps the richest vocabulary of all languages, in part because its words are culled from so many languages.
It is a shame that we do not tap this rich source more often in our daily conversation to express ourselves more clearly and precisely.
There are of course thesauruses but they mainly list common words.
Other vocabulary books list difficult, esoteric words that we quickly forget or feel self-conscious using.
However, there is a bounty of choice words between the common and the esoteric that often seem be just on the tip of our tongue.
Although this makes a definition less precise, it also makes it easier to remember.
Many common words appear in the list of words, but with their less common meanings.
For example, the common meaning of champion is “winner.” A less common meaning for champion is to support or fight for someone else.
As you read through the list of words, mark any that you do not know with a check mark.
Then when you read through the list again, mark any that you do not remember with two checks.
Continue in this manner until you have learned the words.
There are four types of quizzes interspersed in the word list: Matching, Antonyms, Analogies, and Sentence Completions.
All the other quizzes contain words from any part of the list.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Directions:  Choose the word most opposite in meaning to the capitalized word.
GRATUITOUS: (A)  voluntary     (B)  arduous     (C)  solicitous (D)  righteous     (E)  befitting.
FALLOW: (A)  fatuous    (B)  productive    (C)  bountiful (D)  pertinacious    (E)  opprobrious.
METTLE: (A)  ad hoc    (B)  perdition    (C)  woe    (D)  trepidation (E)  apathy.
RIFE: (A)  multitudinous       (B)  blemished       (C)  sturdy (D)  counterfeit       (E)  sparse.
ABRIDGE: (A)  distend     (B)  assail     (C)  unfetter     (D)  enfeeble (E)  prove.
PRODIGAL: (A)  bountiful    (B)  dependent    (C)  provident (D)  superfluous     (E)  profligate.
REQUIEM: (A)  humility   (B)  prerequisite   (C)  resolution (D)  reign   (E)  hiatus.
METE: (A)  indict     (B)  convoke     (C)  hamper     (D)  disseminate (E)  deviate.
SEVERANCE: (A)  continuation    (B)  dichotomy    (C)  astringency (D)  disclosure    (E)  remonstrance.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Directions:  Choose the word most opposite in meaning to the capitalized word.
HYPOCRITICAL: (A)  forthright      (B)  judicious      (C)  circumspect (D)  puritanical      (E)  unorthodox.
VOLUMINOUS: (A)  obscure    (B)  cantankerous    (C)  unsubstantial (D)  tenacious     (E)  opprobrious.
FANATICISM: (A)  delusion       (B)  fascism       (C)  remorse (D)  cynicism       (E)  indifference.
INTERMINABLE: (A)  finite       (B)  jejune       (C)  tranquil (D)  incessant       (E)  imprudent.
ORNATE: (A)  Spartan       (B)  blemished       (C)  sturdy (D)  counterfeit       (E)  temporary.
MUTABILITY: (A)  simplicity      (B)  apprehension      (C)  frailty (D)  maverick       (E)  tenacity.
VIRULENT: (A)  benign       (B)  intrepid       (C)  malignant (D)  hyperbolic       (E)  tentative.
ABSTEMIOUS: (A)  timely       (B)  immoderate       (C)  bellicose (D)  servile       (E)  irreligious.
VERBOSE: (A)  subliminal       (B)  myopic       (C)  pithy (D)  dauntless       (E)  ubiquitous.
VISCID: (A)  subtle       (B)  faint       (C)  slick       (D)  vicious (E)  difficult.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Directions:  Choose the word most opposite in meaning to the capitalized word.
DERISION: (A)  urgency      (B)  admonishment      (C)  uniqueness (D)  diversity       (E)  acclaim.
ANTIPATHY: (A)  fondness     (B)  disagreement     (C)  boorishness (D)  provocation       (E)  opprobrium.
CAJOLE: (A)  implore       (B)  glance at       (C)  belittle (D)  ennoble       (E)  engender.
CENSURE: (A)  prevaricate       (B)  titillate       (C)  aggrandize (D)  obscure       (E)  sanction.
ADULATION: (A)  immutability      (B)  reluctance      (C)  reflection (D)  defamation       (E)  indifference.
NOISOME: (A)  salubrious       (B)  affable       (C)  multifarious (D)  provident       (E)  officious.
CONSECRATE: (A)  curb       (B)  destroy       (C)  curse (D)  inveigh       (E)  exculpate.
ILLUSTRIOUS: (A)  bellicose       (B)  ignoble       (C)  theoretical (D)  esoteric       (E)  immaculate.
DEIGN: (A)  inveigh      (B)  gainsay      (C)  speculate      (D)  reject (E)  laud.
SUBTERFUGE: (A)  bewilderment      (B)  artlessness       (C)  deceit (D)  felicitation       (E)  jeopardy.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Directions:  Choose the word most opposite in meaning to the capitalized word.
UPSHOT: (A)  consequence       (B)  descent       (C)  annihilation (D)  termination       (E)  inception.
WHET: (A)  obscure       (B)  blunt       (C)  desiccate (D)  imbibe       (E)  enervate.
PRODIGY: (A)  vacuous comment      (B)  hegemony      (C)  plane (D)  common occurrence       (E)  capitulation.
AMBULATORY: (A)  immutable    (B)  obdurate (C)  hospitalized    (D)  pedantic    (E)  stationary.
PLATITUDE: (A)  sincere comment       (B)  enigmatic comment (C)  hostile comment       (D)  disingenuous comment (E)  original comment.
SEEMLY: (A)  redoubtable       (B)  flaccid       (C)  imperceptible (D)  indigenous       (E)  unbecoming.
CHAMPION: (A)  relinquish       (B)  contest       (C)  oppress (D)  modify       (E)  withhold.
AIR: (A)  release       (B)  differ       (C)  expose (D)  betray       (E)  enshroud.
PERTURBATION: (A)  impotence       (B)  obstruction (C)  prediction       (D)  equanimity       (E)  chivalry.
TEMPESTUOUS: (A)  prodigal       (B)  reticent       (C)  serene (D)  phenomenal       (E)  accountable.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Directions:  Choose the word most opposite in meaning to the capitalized word.
CURB: (A)  bridle       (B)  encourage       (C)  reproach (D)  ameliorate       (E)  perjure.
DOCUMENT: (A)  copy       (B)  implement       (C)  gainsay (D)  blanch       (E)  rant.
FLUID: (A)  radiant      (B)  smooth       (C)  solid (D)  balky       (E)  craggy.
BOLT: (A)  linger       (B)  refrain from       (C)  subdue (D)  strip       (E)  transgress.
TABLE: (A)  palliate       (B)  acclimate       (C)  garner (D)  propound       (E)  expedite.
HARBOR: (A)  provide shelter       (B)  banish       (C)  acquiesce (D)  extol       (E)  capitulate.
STEEP: (A)  desiccate       (B)  intensify       (C)  pontificate (D)  whet       (E)  hamper.
RENT: (A)  reserved       (B)  restored       (C)  razed (D)  busy       (E)  kinetic.
EXACT: (A)  extract       (B)  starve       (C)  lecture (D)  menace       (E)  condone.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Directions:  Choose the word most opposite in meaning to the capitalized word.
DISCORD: (A)  agreement      (B)  supposition       (C)  strife (D)  scrutiny       (E)  antithesis.
KEEN: (A)  concentrated      (B)  languid      (C)  rash (D)  caustic       (E)  voracious.
IRRELEVANT: (A)  moot      (B)  onerous      (C)  impertinent (D)  germane      (E)  true.
FACILITATE: (A)  appease      (B)  expedite      (C)  extol (D)  foil      (E)  precipitate.
FEND: (A)  absorb      (B)  disperse      (C)  intensify (D)  reflect      (E)  halt.
PORTLY: (A) ill      (B) thin      (C) dull (D) rotund      (E) insipid.
DEPLETE: (A)  tax     (B)  annotate      (C)  replenish (D)  lecture      (E)  vanquish.
INCESSANT: (A)  intermittent      (B)  continual      (C)  increasing (D)  enclosing      (E)  expanding.
PERJURE: (A)  absolve      (B)  forswear      (C)  impeach (D) authenticate      (E)  mortify.
PLETHORA: (A) dishonor      (B)  paucity      (C)  glut (D)  resolve      (E)  deluge.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Directions:  Choose the word most opposite in meaning to the capitalized word.
ASSIMILATE: (A)  strive      (B) adapt      (C)  synchronize (D)  estrange      (E) officiate.
INADVERTENT: (A)  accidental     (B)  disingenuous     (C)  forthright (D)  inconsiderate      (E)  calculated.
ABSCOND: (A)  pilfer      (B)  replace      (C)  glean (D)  substitute      (E)  surrender.
FOMENT: (A)  exhort      (B) dissuade      (C)  cower (D)  abet      (E)  fixate.
EXTENUATE: (A)  alleviate      (B)  preclude      (C)  worsen (D)  subdue      (E)  justify.
NONPAREIL: (A)  consummate      (B)  juvenile      (C)  dutiful (D)  ordinary      (E)  choice.
REPUDIATE: (A)  denounce       (B)  deceive       (C)  embrace (D)  fib       (E)  generalize.
NOXIOUS: (A)  diffuse       (B)  latent       (C)  beneficial (D)  unique       (E)  unjust.
SUFFRAGE: (A)  absence of charity      (B)  absence of franchise (C)  absence of pain      (D)  absence of success (E)  absence of  malice.
GLEAN: (A)  gaffe       (B)  furor       (C)  gather (D)  frolic       (E)  foist.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Directions:  Choose the pair that expresses a relationship most similar to that expressed in the capitalized pair.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Directions:  Choose the pair that expresses a relationship most similar to that expressed in the capitalized pair.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Directions:  Choose the pair that expresses a relationship most similar to that expressed in the capitalized pair.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Directions:  Choose the pair that expresses a relationship most similar to that expressed in the capitalized pair.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Directions:  Choose the pair that expresses a relationship most similar to that expressed in the capitalized pair.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Directions:  Choose the pair that expresses a relationship most similar to that expressed in the capitalized pair.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Directions:  Choose the pair that expresses a relationship most similar to that expressed in the capitalized pair.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Directions:  Choose the pair that expresses a relationship most similar to that expressed in the capitalized pair.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Directions:  Choose the pair that expresses a relationship most similar to that expressed in the capitalized pair.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Match each word in the first column with its definition in the second column.
Though most explicitly sexist words have been replaced by gender-neutral terms, sexism.
The aspiring candidate’s performance in the debate all but ___________
Although this is often the mark of a beginner, Williams pulls it off masterfully.
Liharev talks about being both a nihilist and an atheist during his life, yet he never does ___________
Hover appeared to be much larger behind his desk; for, having skillfully designed his office, he.
Existentialism can be used to rationalize evil: if one does not like the rules of society and has no conscience, he may use existentialism as a means of ___________
These categories amply point out the fundamental desire that people have to express themselves and the cleverness they display in that expression; who would have believed that the drab, mundane DMV would become the ___________
This argues well that Erikson exercised less free will than Warner; for even though Erikson was aware that he was misdirected, he was sti l l  unable to ___________
Man has no choice but to seek truth, he is made uncomfortable and frustrated without truth—thus, the quest for truth is part of what.
Word Analysis Word analysis (etymology) is the process of separating a word into its parts and then using the meanings of those parts to deduce the meaning of the original word.
It is made up of three parts: a prefix IN (not), a root TERMIN (stop), and a suffix ABLE (can do)
Therefore, by word analysis, INTERMINABLE means “not able to stop.”  This is not the literal meaning of INTERMINABLE (endless), but it is close enough.
It is made up of the prefix RETRO (back) and the root SPECT (to look)
Hence, RETROSPECT means “to look back (in time), to contemplate.”
Word analysis is very effective in decoding the meaning of words.
However, you must be careful in its application since words do not always have the same meaning as the sum of the meanings of their parts.
In fact, on occasion words can have the opposite meaning of their parts.
For example, by word analysis the word AWFUL should mean “full of awe,” or awe-inspiring.
But over the years it has come to mean just the opposite—terrible.
In spite of the shortcomings, word analysis gives the correct meaning of a word (or at least a hint of it) far more often than not and therefore is a useful tool.
Following are some of the most useful prefixes, roots, and suffixes.
Suffixes determine the part of speech a word belongs to.
They are not as useful for determining a word’s meaning as are roots and prefixes.
Note: AMORAL does not mean immoral; rather it means neither right nor wrong.
Consider the following example:  Little Susie, who does not realize that it is wrong to hit other people, hits little Bobby.
However, if her mother explains to Susie that it is wrong to hit other people and she understands it but still hits Bobby, then she has committed an immoral act.
Idiom & Usage The field of grammar is huge and complex—tomes have been written on the subject.
This complexity should be no surprise since grammar deals with the process of communication.
Usage concerns how we choose our words and how we express our thoughts: in other words, are the connections between the words in a sentence logically sound, and are they expressed in a way that conforms to standard idiom?  We will study six major categories:
The key point for the use of pronouns is this:
A pronoun should be plural when it refers to two nouns joined by and.
The plural pronoun they refers to the compound subject Jane and Katarina.
A pronoun should be singular when it refers to two nouns joined by or or nor.
A pronoun should refer to one and only one noun or compound noun.
If a pronoun follows two nouns, it is often unclear which of the nouns the pronoun refers to.
The breakup of the Soviet Union has left nuclear weapons  in the hands of unstable, nascent countries.
It is imperative to world security that they be destroyed.
Although one is unlikely to take the sentence to mean that the countries must be destroyed, that interpretation is possible from the structure of the sentence.
The breakup of the Soviet Union has left nuclear weapons  in the hands of unstable, nascent countries.
It is imperative to world security that these weapons be destroyed.
In Somalia, they have become jaded by the constant warfare.
This construction is faulty because they does not have an antecedent.
The sentence can be corrected by replacing they with people:
In Somalia, people have become jaded by the constant warfare.
The people of Somalia have become jaded by the constant warfare.
In addition to agreeing with its antecedent in number, a pronoun must agree with its antecedent in person.
In this sentence, the subject has changed from one (third person) to you (second person)
To correct the sentence either replace one with you or vice versa:
Drill I In each of the following sentences, part or all of the sentence is underlined.
The answer-choices offer five ways of phrasing the underlined part.
If you think the sentence as written is better than the alternatives, choose A, which merely repeats the underlined part; otherwise choose one of the alternatives.
Had the President’s Administration not lost the vote on the budget reduction package, his first year in office would have been rated an A.
The new law requires a manufacturer to immediately notify their customers whenever the government is contemplating a forced recall of any of the manufacturer’s products.
World War II taught the United States the folly of punishing a vanquished aggressor; so after the war, they enacted the Marshall Plan to rebuild Germany.
In the 1950’s, integration was an anathema to most Americans; now, however, most Americans accept it as desirable.
Andreas Fault, one that they believe to be a trigger for major quakes on the San Andreas.
A bite from the tsetse fly invariably paralyzes its victims unless an antidote is administered within two hours.
SUBJECT-VERB AGREEMENT Within a sentence there are certain requirements for the relationship between the subject and the verb.
The subject and verb must agree both in number and person.
We have surpassed our sales goal of one million dollars.
Here, the first person plural verb have agrees with its first person plural subject we.
Note, ironically, third person singular verbs often end in s or es:
Intervening phrases and clauses have no effect on subject-verb agreement.
Here, the singular verb was agrees with its singular subject one.
The intervening prepositional phrase of the President’s nominees has no effect on the number or person of the verb.
When the subject and verb are reversed, they still must agree in both number and person.
Here, the plural verb are attached agrees with its plural subject copies.
The rising cost of government bureaucracy have made it all but impossible to reign in the budget deficit.
In a co-publication agreement, ownership of both the material and its means of distribution are equally shared by the parties.
The rise in negative attitudes toward foreigners indicate that the country is becoming less tolerant, and therefore that the opportunities are ripe for extremist groups to exploit the illegal immigration problem.
The harvest of grapes in the local valleys decreased in 1990 for the third straight year but were still at a robust level.
As a general rule, a modifier should be placed as close as.
Following are some useful tips for protecting your person and property from the FBI.
As written, the sentence implies that the FBI is a threat to your person and property.
To correct the sentence put the modifier from the FBI next to the word it modifies, tips:
Following are some useful tips from the FBI for protecting your person and property.
When a phrase begins a sentence, make sure that it modifies the subject of the sentence.
Coming around the corner, a few moments passed before I could recognize my old home.
As worded, the sentence implies that the moments were coming around the corner.
As I came around the corner, a few moments passed before I could recognize my old home.
Coming around the corner, I paused a few moments before I could recognize my old home.
By focusing on poverty, the other causes of crime—such as the breakup of the nuclear family, changing morals, the loss of community, etc.—have been overlooked by sociologists.
Using the Hubble telescope, previously unknown galaxies are now being charted.
The bitter cold the Midwest is experiencing is potentially life threatening to stranded motorists unless well-insulated with protective clothing.
Traveling across and shooting the vast expanse of the Southwest, in 1945 Ansel Adams began his photographic career.
For a sentence to be parallel, similar elements must be expressed.
When two adjectives modify the same noun, they should have similar forms.
Since both rigorous and a challenge are modifying course, they should have the same form:
When a series of clauses is listed, the verbs in each clause must have the same form.
During his trip to Europe, the President will discuss ways to stimulate trade, offer economic aid, and trying to forge a new coalition with moderate forces in Russia.
In this example, the first two verbs, discuss and offer, are active.
But the third verb in the series, trying, is passive.
During his trip to Europe, the President will discuss ways to stimulate trade, offer economic aid, and try to forge a new coalition with moderate forces in Russia.
When the first half of a sentence has a certain structure, the second half should preserve that structure.
To acknowledge that one is an alcoholic is taking the first and hardest step to recovery.
The first half of the above sentence has an infinitive structure, to acknowledge, so the second half must have a similar structure:
To acknowledge that one is an alcoholic is to take the first and hardest step to recovery.
Common knowledge tells us that sensible exercise and eating properly will result in better health.
This century began with war brewing in Europe, the industrial revolution well-established, and a nascent communication age.
It is often better to try repairing an old car than to junk it.
During a recession, people are cautious about taking on more debt.
Used to form the present perfect tense, which indicates that.
It is formed using have or has and the past participle of the verb.
Used to form the past perfect tense, which indicates that an action was completed before another past action.
It is formed using had and the past participle of the verb.
Used to form the future perfect tense, which indicates that an action will be completed before another future action.
It is formed using will have or shall have and the past participle of the verb.
It is formed using is, am, or are and the present participle of the verb.
Used to form the past progressive tense, which indicates that an action was in progress in the past.
It is formed using was or were and the present participle of the verb.
Used to form the future progressive tense, which indicates that an action will be in progress in the future.
It is formed using will be or shall be and the present participle of the verb.
It is formed with the verb to be and the past participle of the main verb.
Unless you want to de-emphasize the doer of an action, you should favor the active voice.
In the past few years and to this day, many teachers of math and science had chosen to return to the private sector.
Most of the homes that were destroyed in last summer’s brush fires were built with wood-shake roofs.
Although World War II ended nearly a half century ago, Russia and Japan still have not signed a formal peace treaty; and both countries have been reticent to develop closer relations.
The Democrats have accused the Republicans of resorting to dirty tricks by planting a mole on the Democrat’s planning committee and then used the information obtained to sabotage the Democrat’s campaign.
Accept means “to agree to” or “to receive.”  Except means “to object to” or “to leave out.”
When receiving blame or credit, the correct idiom is account to:
You will have to account to the state for your crimes.
Adapted to means “naturally suited for.”  Adapted for means “created to be suited for.”  Adapted from means “changed to be suited for.”
The polar bear is a d a p t e d  t o  the subzero temperatures.
For any “New Order” to be successful, it must be adapted for the continually changing world power structure.
Lucas’ latest release is adapted from the 1950 B-movie “Attack of the Amazons.”
Increased fighting will be the effect of the failed peace conference.
Between should be used when referring to two things, and among should be used when referring to more than two things.
Being that is nonstandard and should be replaced by since.
Adding an s to beside completely changes its meaning: Beside means “next to.”  Besides means “in addition.”
Besides (in addition), money was not even an issue in the contract negotiations.
The penalty does not correspond to the severity of the crime.
He corresponded with many of the top European leaders of his time.
The new Cadillacs are very different from the imported luxury cars.
Use farther when referring to distance, and use further when referring to degree.
He threw the discs farther (distance) than the top seated competitor.
This bid is identical with the one submitted by you.
In contrast to the conservative attitudes of her time, Mae West was quite provocative.
The judiciary is independent of the other branches of government.
Because is always better than the circumlocution on account of.
Each other should be used when referring to two things, and one another should be used when referring to more than two things.
The members of the basketball team (more than two) congratulated one another on their victory.
The business partners (two) congratulated each other on their successful first year.
Note: Plus can be used to mean and so long as it is not being used as a conjunction.
In this sentence, plus is being used as a preposition.
Note that the verb has is singular because an intervening prepositional phrase (plus his donated time) does not affect subject verb agreement.
Unless you are giving best wishes to someone, you should use regard.
Regardless  means “not withstanding.”  Hence, the “ir” in irregardless is redundant.
To speak with someone is to discuss something with them:
Equally common and doubly redundant is the structure the reason why is because.
The circumlocution as to whether should be replaced by whether.
A common mistake is to use if to present a choice.
Regarding legalization of drugs, I am not concerned so much by its potential impact on middle class America but instead by its potential impact on the inner city.
Unless you maintain at least a 2.0 GPA, you will not graduate medical school.
Due to the chemical spill, the commute into the city will be delayed by as much as 2 hours.
A pronoun should be plural when it refers to two nouns joined by and.
A pronoun should be singular when it refers to two nouns joined by or or nor.
A pronoun should refer to one and only one noun or compound noun.
A pronoun must agree with its antecedent in both number and person.
The subject and verb must agree both in number and person.
Intervening phrases and clauses have no effect on subject-verb agreement.
When the subject and verb are reversed, they still must agree in both number and person.
As a general rule, a modifier should be placed as close as possible to what it modifies.
When a phrase begins a sentence, make sure that it modifies the subject of the sentence.
For a sentence to be parallel, similar elements must be expressed in similar form.
When two adjectives modify the same noun, they should have similar forms.
When a series of clauses is listed, the verbs must be in the same form.
When the first half of a sentence has a certain structure, the second half should preserve that structure.
Used to form the present perfect tense, which indicates that an action was started in the past and its effects are continuing in the present.
It is formed using have or has and the past participle of the verb.
Used to form the past perfect tense, which indicates that an action was completed before another past action.
It is formed using had and the past participle of the verb.
Used to form the future perfect tense, which indicates that an action will be completed before another future action.
It is formed using will have or shall have and the past participle of the verb.
It is formed using is, am, or are and the present participle of the verb.
Used to form the past progressive tense, which indicates that an action was in progress in the past.
It is formed using was or were and the present participle of the verb.
Used to form the future progressive tense, which indicates that an action will be in progress in the future.
It is formed using will be or shall be and the present participle of the verb.
Unless you want to de-emphasize the doer of an action, you should favor the active voice.
Choice (A) is incorrect because his appears to refer to the President, but the subject of the subordinate clause is the President’s Administration, not the President.
Choice (B) changes the structure of the sentence, but retains the same flawed reference.
In choice (C), it can refer to either the President’s Administration or the budget reduction package.
Choice (D) adds another pronoun, its, but still retains the same flawed reference.
Choice (E) corrects the flawed reference by removing all pronouns.
The new law requires a manufacturer to immediately notify their customers whenever the government is contemplating a forced recall of any of the manufacturer’s products.
Choice (A) is incorrect because the plural pronoun their cannot have the singular noun a manufacturer as its antecedent.
Although choice (B) corrects the given false reference, it introduces another one.
Their can now refer to either customers or government, neither of which would make sense in this context.
Choice (C) also corrects the false reference, but it introduces a redundancy: immediately means “without delay.”
Choice (D) corrects the false reference, but its structure is very awkward.
The direct object of a verb should be as close to the verb as possible.
In this case, the verb notify is separated from its direct object customers  by the clause “that the government is contemplating a forced recall of any of the manufacturer’s products that.”
Choice (E) is correct because the singular pronoun its has the singular noun a manufacturer as its antecedent.
World War II taught the United States the folly of punishing a vanquished aggressor; so after the war, they enacted the Marshall Plan to rebuild Germany.
Since United States is denoting the collective country, it is singular and therefore cannot be correctly referred to by the plural pronoun they.
Choice (B) is not technically incorrect, but it lacks precision since it does not state who enacted the Marshall Plan.
Choice (C) states who enacted the Marshall Plan, but it retains the passive construction “was enacted.”
Choice (D) corrects the false reference by replacing they with the United States.
Further, it uses the active verb enacted instead of the passive verb was enacted.
In the 1950’s, integration was an anathema to most Americans; now, however, most Americans accept it as desirable.
Choice (B) creates a run-on sentence by replacing the semicolon with a comma.
Without a connecting word—and, or, but, etc.—two independent clauses must be joined by a semicolon or written as two separate sentences.
Also, deleting “as desirable” changes the meaning of the sentence.
Choice (C) uses a very awkward construction: are desirable of it.
The sentence progresses from the past to the present, so the verb in the second clause should be accept, not accepted.
Choice (E) writes the two clauses as separate sentences, which is allowable, but it also changes the tense of the second clause to the future: will accept.
Andreas Fault, one that they believe to be a trigger for major quakes on the San Andreas.
Choice (A) is incorrect since the relative pronoun that is redundant: the pronoun one, which refers to the newly discovered fault, is sufficient.
Although choice (C) reads more smoothly, it still contains the double pronouns.
Generally, relative pronouns such as that refer to whole ideas in previous clauses or sentences.
Since the second sentence is about the fault and not its discovery, the pronoun that is appropriate.
It actually reads better than choice (A), but it contains a subtle flaw.
One is the direct object of the verb believes and therefore cannot be the subject of the verb acts.
Since they clearly is not the subject, the verb acts is without a subject.
Choice (B) has both the correct pronoun and the correct verb form.
A bite from the tsetse fly invariably paralyzes its victims unless an antidote is administered within two hours.
Choice (A) is incorrect since it is unclear whether the victim or the fly should receive the antidote.
Choice (B) is incorrect since is is more direct than can be.
A statement of fact should be expressed in the present tense, not the past tense.
A pronoun should be used for the phrase the victims.
Choice (E) is the answer since they correctly identifies who should receive the antidote.
Choice (A) is incorrect because the plural verb have does not agree with its singular subject the rising cost.
Both (B) and (C) are incorrect because they turn the sentence into a fragment.
Choice (E) is incorrect because rising cost is still singular.
Choice (D) is the correct answer since now the plural verb have.
In a co-publication agreement, ownership of both the material and its means of distribution are equally shared by the parties.
Recall that intervening phrases have no effect on subject-verb agreement.
In this sentence, the subject ownership is singular, but the verb are is plural.
Dropping the intervening phrase clearly shows that the sentence is ungrammatical:
In a co-publication, agreement ownership are equally shared by the parties.
Neither adding each of nor interchanging shared and equally addresses the issue of subject-verb agreement.
The antecedent of the plural pronoun their would be the singular noun material.
Choice (E) is incorrect since it still contains the plural verb are.
The rise in negative attitudes toward foreigners indicate that the country is becoming less tolerant, and therefore that the opportunities are ripe for extremist groups to exploit the illegal immigration problem.
First, the subject of the sentence the rise is singular, and therefore the verb indicate should not be plural.
Second, the comma indicates that the sentence is made up of two independent clauses, but the relative pronoun that immediately following therefore forms a subordinate clause.
Choice (C) corrects the number of the verb, but retains the subordinating relative pronoun that.
Choice (D) corrects the number of the verb and eliminates the subordinating relative pronoun that.
However, the verb being is less descriptive than the verb becoming:  As negative attitudes toward foreigners increase, the country becomes correspondingly less tolerant.
Choice (E) corrects the verb’s number, and by dropping the comma, makes the subordination allowable.
However, it introduces the preposition of which does not have an object: less tolerant of what?
Choice (B) both corrects the verb’s number and removes the subordinating relative pronoun that.
The harvest of grapes in the local valleys decreased in 1990 for the third straight year but were still at a robust level.
Choice (A) is incorrect since the singular subject the harvest requires a singular verb, not the plural verb were.
Choice (B) is illogical since it states that the harvest began to decrease in 1990 and then it states that it was the third straight year of decrease.
In choice (C) the plural verb were still does not agree with its singular subject the harvest.
Choice (D) has the singular verb was agreeing with its singular subject the harvest.
When each, every, or many a precedes two or more subjects linked by and, they separate the subjects and the verb is singular.
Hence, in choice (B) the plural verb have is incorrect.
Choice (C) is incorrect since the singular verb has does not agree with the plural subject all.
When each follows a plural subject it does not separate the subjects and the verb remains plural.
Hence, in choice (D) the singular verb has is incorrect.
Choice (E) also changes the meaning of the original sentence, which states that the protagonist do have powerful, dynamic personalities.
Choice (A) is incorrect since it implies that the other causes of crime are doing the focusing.
The phrase by focusing on poverty must modify the subject of the sentence, but there cannot be the subject since the construction there are is used to introduce a subject.
Choice (E) puts the subject of the sentence sociologists immediately next to its modifying phrase by focusing on poverty.
Using the Hubble telescope, previously unknown galaxies are now being charted.
Choice (A) is incorrect because the phrase using the Hubble telescope does not have a noun to modify.
Choice (B) is incorrect because the phrase using the Hubble telescope still does not have a noun to modify.
Choice (C) offers a noun, astronomers, but it is too far from the phrase using the Hubble telescope.
In choice (E), the phrase with the aid of the Hubble telescope does not have a noun to modify.
Choice (D) offers a noun, astronomers, and places it immediately after the modifying phrase using the Hubble telescope.
The bitter cold the Midwest is experiencing is potentially life threatening to stranded motorists unless well-insulated with protective clothing.
As worded, the sentence implies that the cold should be well insulated.
Choice (B) is awkward; besides, it still implies that the cold should be well insulated.
Choice (E), like choices (A) and (B), implies that the cold should be well insulated.
Choice (C) is the answer since it correctly implies that the stranded motorists should be well insulated with protective clothing.
Traveling across and shooting the vast expanse of the Southwest, in 1945 Ansel Adams began his photographic career.
Second, the subject Ansel Adams should immediately follow the introductory phrase since it was Ansel Adams—not the year 1945who was traveling and shooting the Southwest.
Choice (B) is incorrect because the phrase “traveling across… Southwest” is too far from its subject Ansel Adams.
As written, the sentence seems to imply that the photographic career was traveling across and shooting the Southwest.
Further, it implies that Adams began his photographic career after he traveled across the Southwest.
Common knowledge tells us that sensible exercise and eating properly will result in better health.
Choice (A) is incorrect since eating properly (verb-adverb) is not parallel to sensible exercise (adjective-noun)
However, a general truth should be expressed in the present tense, not in the past tense.
Choice (C) is not parallel since it pairs the noun exercise with the gerund (a verb acting as a noun) dieting.
Choice (D) offers two parallel nouns—exercise and diet—and two parallel verbs—tells and results.
This century began with war brewing in Europe, the industrial revolution well-established, and a nascent communication age.
Although the first two phrases, war brewing in Europe and the industrial revolution well-established, have different structures, the thoughts are parallel.
However, the third phrase, and a nascent communication age, is not parallel to the first two.
Choice (B) does not make the third phrase parallel to the first two.
Choice (C) changes the meaning of the sentence: the new formulation states that war already existed in Europe while the original sentence states that war was only developing.
Choice (E) is not parallel since the first two phrases in the series are noun phrases, but saw the birth of the communication age is a verb phrase.
When a word introduces a series, each element of the series must agree with the introductory word.
You can test the correctness of a phrase in a series by dropping the other phrases and checking whether the remaining phrase agrees with the introductory word.
In this series, each phrase must be the object of the preposition with:
This century began with saw the birth of the communication age.
In this form, it is clear the verb saw cannot be the object of the preposition with.
It is often better to try repairing an old car than to junk it.
Choice (A) is incorrect since the verb repairing is not parallel to the verb junk.
In choice (B), the construction have it junked is awkward.
Further, it changes the original construction from active to passive.
Choice (D) also offers a parallel construction (repair/junk), but the construction try and is not idiomatic.
Choice (E) offers a parallel construction (repair/junk), and the correct idiom—try to.
Choice (A) is incorrect since the verb written is not parallel to the construction which was … printed.
Choice (B) is the correct answer since the sentence is concise and the verb written is parallel to the verb printed.
Choice (A) is incorrect because it uses the past perfect had chosen, which describes an event that has been completed before another event.
But the sentence implies that teachers have and are continuing to return to the private sector.
Choice (B) is incorrect because it uses the present progressive tense having chosen, which describes an ongoing event.
Although this is the case, it does not capture the fact that the event began in the past.
Choice (C) is incorrect because it uses the simple past chose, which describes a past event.
But again, the sentence implies that the teachers are continuing to opt for the private sector.
Choice (D) is the correct answer because it uses the present perfect have chosen to describe an event that occurred in the past and is continuing into the present.
Choice (E) is incorrect because it leaves the thought in the sentence uncompleted.
Most of the homes that were destroyed in last summer’s brush fires were built with wood-shake roofs.
Choice (A) is incorrect because the simple past were does not express the fact that the homes had been built before the fire destroyed them.
Choice (B) merely rearranges the wording while retaining the simple past were.
Choice (C) is the correct answer because it uses the past perfect had been to indicate that the homes were completely built before they were destroyed by the fires.
Choice (D) is incorrect because it uses the present perfect have been, which implies that the homes were destroyed before being built.
Although dropping the phrase that were makes the sentence more concise, the past progressive were being implies that the homes were destroyed while being built.
Although World War II ended nearly a half century ago, Russia and Japan still have not signed a formal peace treaty; and both countries have been reticent to develop closer relations.
The present perfect verb have … signed correctly indicates that they have not signed a peace treaty and are not on the verge of signing one.
Further, the present perfect verb have been correctly indicates that in the past both countries have been reluctant to develop closer relations and are still reluctant.
In choice (B), the simple past did does not capture the fact that they did not sign a peace treaty immediately after the war and still have not signed one.
Choice (C) is very awkward, and the present progressive being does not capture the fact that the countries have been reluctant to thaw relations since after the war up through the present.
In choice (D), the present tense are leaves open the possibility that in the past the countries may have desired closer relations but now no longer do.
In choice (E), the present progressive tense are … signing, as in choice (D), leaves open the possibility that in the past the countries may have desired closer relations but now no longer do.
The Democrats have accused the Republicans of resorting to dirty tricks by planting a mole on the Democrat’s planning committee and then used the information obtained to sabotage the Democrat’s campaign.
Choice (A) is incorrect because the simple past obtained does not express the fact that the information was gotten before another past action—the sabotage.
Choice (B) is incorrect because used is not parallel to of resorting.
Choice (C) is correct because the phrase of using is parallel to the phrase of resorting.
Further, the past perfect had obtained correctly expresses that a past action—the spying—was completed before another past action—the sabotage.
Choice (D) is incorrect because using is not parallel to of resorting and the past perfect is not used.
Choice (E) is incorrect because to have used is not parallel to of resorting and the past perfect is not used.
Regarding legalization of drugs, I am not concerned so much by its potential impact on middle class America but instead by its potential impact on the inner city.
Unless you maintain at least a 2.0 GPA, you will not graduate medical school.
In this context, graduate requires the word from: “you will not graduate from medical school.”
The use of the passive voice in choices (B) and (C) weakens the sentence.
Choice (D) is the answer since it uses the correct idiom graduate from.
Choice (E) changes the meaning of the sentence and does not correct the faulty idiom.
Hence, in the phrase refers back, the word back is redundant.
Choice (B) is incorrect because harkens back is also redundant.
Choice (D) is incorrect because the preposition from is nonidiomatic.
Choice (E) is incorrect because looks back is also redundant.
Due to the chemical spill, the commute into the city will be delayed by as much as 2 hours.
Although many educated writers and speakers begin sentences with due to, it is almost always incorrect.
Choice (B) is incorrect: it is both redundant and awkward.
The past perfect had been delayed implies the delay no longer exists.
In general, due to should not be used as a substitute for because of, owing to, by reason of, etc.
The future progressive will be delaying is unnecessary and ponderous.
Had choice (E) used the simple future will delay, it would have been better that choice (D) because then it would be more direct and active.
No part of this book nay be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
The 600 words in each book of this series along with the additional target words presented in the appendices included in the first three books of the series are the most useful words in English.
They were found by analysis of a collection of English course books from various levels in the primary, secondary and tertiary school systems.
The words included in this series were chosen because they occurred many times in different levels of these materials.
Because of the way that they were chosen, these words have the following characteristics:
No matter what English course you are studying, the words in these books will be of value to you.
This means that the effort in learning the words is well repaid by the number of times learners have a chance to encounter or use them.
These books as a whole cover a large proportion of the words in any spoken or written text.
They also cover at least 90% of the words in conversation.
The activities in these books are specially designed to make use of important learning conditions.
Firstly, the words are introduced using sentence definitions and an example sentence.
The activities that follow in the units encourage learners to recall the meanings and forms of the words.
Some activities also make the learners think about the meaning of the words in the context of a sentence— a sentence different from the sentences that occurred in the introduction of the words.
Moreover, each unit ends with a story containing the target words.
While reading the story, the learners have to recall the meanings of the words and suit them to the context of the story.
Such activities help learners develop a better understanding of a common meaning for a given word which fits the different uses.
Illustrations for each target word are provided to help learners visualize the word as it is being used in the example sentence.
It should be noted that words have more than one grammatical category.
However, this series focuses on the word’s most common form.
This is mentioned to remind learners that just because a word is labeled and utilized as a noun in this series does not mean that it can never be used in another form such as an adjective.
A well-balanced language course provides four major opportunities for learning: learning through input, learning through output, deliberate learning, and fluency development.
The highly structured activities in these books support all four types of learning opportunities.
In addition, learning can further be supported through the following activities:
Have students create vocabulary cards with one word from the unit on one side of the card and the translation of the word in the student’s first language on the other side.
Students should use the cards for study in free moments during the day.
Over several weeks, students will find that quick repeated studying for brief periods of time is more effective than studying for hours at one sitting.
Reading such books provides both enjoyment as well as meaning-focused input which will help the words stick in.
Practice reading fluency to promote faster recall of word meaning for both sight recognition and usage.
Compass Publishing’s Reading for Speed and Fluency is a good resource for reading fluency material.
Reinforcement of the high-frequency vocabulary presented in this series is important across all the four.
His specialist interests are language teaching methodology and vocabulary learning.
If people or things are frantic, they behave in a wild way because they are frightened —* The cat became frantic when I tried to give it a bath.
When an action is inadvertent, it is done without realizing what you are doing.
She made an inadvertent error when she knocked over the nail polish.
The latitude of a place is its distance from the equator.
The device was able to tell the traveler his exact latitude.
A multitude of things or people is a very large number of them.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
He chose to paint a picture on the main body of the boat.
When the plane crashed on the island, the passenger knew he was prevented from leaving.
I admired the very large number of stamps in his collection.
I took some aspirin to make less my back pain.
The countries were concerned about the treaty’s ability to last forever.
Australia’s distance from the equator is less extreme than I imagined.
I’m still not sure if the math operation I did was correct.
When the rats got out of the cage, the girl was behaving in a wild wav because of fear.
The incorrect or partly correct information gave us the wrong idea about the president.
When he forgot his rope at home, he had to make one using whatever was available.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
She loves to improvise peanut butter and jelly sandwiches for lunch.
This math book is full of equations for students to practice.
The expert in astrology went to work every day to study rocks and soil.
This math problem is tricky, so be careful not to err.
The permanence of the flood was gone in a couple of days.
After months of planning, the inadvertent decision to sell the company was carried out.
What differentiates Dan from his brother is Dan’s unmatched love of sports.
I The North Star Among the multitude of stars in the universe, there are a couple that are of great.
Before the invention of modern navigation tools, mariners relied on Polaris.
From the top of their hulls, sailors would look for Polaris to figure out their place at sea.
They figured out the angle between the star and the horizon to determine their latitude.
As long as the equations weren’t erroneous, the results were very reliable.
By knowing directions and their location, mariners could easily navigate their ships.
To those who sail at night, volatile storms and dark clouds were more than nuisances.
They could disrupt entire journeys by blocking the view of Polaris.
A captain could err and make an inadvertent wrong turn.
The ship could become stranded at sea, and the frantic captain would have no way to improvise to get the ship back on the right course.
The mariner’s fears wouldn’t be soothed until the clouds cleared and Polaris came back into view.
Even today, sailors sometimes opt to navigate by using Polaris on clear nights.
The Big Dipper, a constellation that is well known in astrology, appears to revolve around Polaris.
When people get lost, it’s comforting to know that their problems can be alleviated by looking at the sky.
Even today, sailors opt to improvise by using Polaris on clear nights.
A ship could become stranded if a captain erred and made an inadvertent wrong turn.
People who are lost can be alleviated by gazing up at a frantic sky.
Volatile storms were more than nuisances because they disrupted entire journeys.
It is not difficult to differentiate Polaris from the multitude of other stars in the universe.
How did mariners determine their latitude from the top of their hulls?
On a cloudy night, when would a mariner finally feel soothed?
In two more years, I will attain my high school diploma.
To coexist with something means to exist with it in the same time and place.
Our pets coexist at our home with little or no problems.
To conceive something means to be able to imagine or believe it.
The child could not conceive the actual size o f the Earth.
When something or someone is dubious, they are not considered honest.
The police thought that the man’s description o f the crime was dubious.
Elastic is a rubber that stretches when it is pulled.
He attached the elastic bungee to his legs before he jumped off the platform.
An endeavor is an attempt to do something, especially something new or original.
The company’s new advertising endeavor ended in a horrible failure.
To excavate means to dig on land and remove dirt to look for something.
The team wishes to excavate the site in hopes o f finding fossils.
A locale is a small area or place where something specific happens.
The spa was the perfect locale for my mother to relax and enjoy her vacation.
Everyone knew that the boy’s story was an outright lie.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
He chose to make his sculpture out of a smooth paste that hardens when it dries.
Our violent and cruel boss forced us to work twelve hours in a row without a break.
The race was close, so it was difficult to determine an open and direct winner.
This is the perfect small area where something happens for a picnic.
Truck drivers often stay awake for many hours to make their difficult and tiring drives.
Mike was thrilled to pass the driving test and gain his driver’s license.
Physics on the moon are much different than Earth-related physics.
The prisoners were unable to imagine and believe a plot for escaping the jail.
To plant these seeds, I will first need to buy a tool used for digging.
What might a person with a large ego say? a.
The alarm clock was set to endeavor every morning at seven A.M.
Experts excavated the site in hopes of finding an ancient city buried underneath.
The elephant is one of the largest terrestrial animals still in existence.
The dubious chocolate ice cream is a favorite treat at the restaurant.
The concerned owner built a fence along the periphery of the parking lot.
Preparing for the difficult test was an arduous task for the nervous students.
You’ ll need a shovel if you plan on getting on top of the roof.
The delicate flower was a jagged addition to the arrangement.
Children cheered as the circus clown attained balloons into different shapes.
He filled the ugly holes in the ceiling with plaster.
At the factory, the workers made screws by pouring liquid metal into a mold.
I hope she is able to engrave all of her homework before school tomorrow.
I cannot conceive the reason why he would act in such a mean way.
The small fights and arguments eventually led to an outright war.
When the glass vase fell to the floor, we heard an elastic sound.
She bought a cute new ego from the pet store today.
We need to choose a locale for Brian’s birthday party.
Derrick bought a skeletal from that new clothing store downtown.
Although they were rivals, the stores were able to coexist in the same neighborhood.
Although Tim and Dean were quite similar, they were outright enemies.
The two men got into vicious arguments all the time.
They couldn’t coexist peacefully because their egos were too large.
Tim thought he was the best fossil hunter, while Dean was sure that he was much better than Tim.
One day, Tim was searching for fossils on the periphery of the city when he discovered a huge bone.
He had never seen anything like it! He took his shovel and carefully excavated the dirt around it.
He realized that he had found an entire dinosaur skeleton! Tim couldn’t conceive a plan to remove the huge skeleton all by himself.
He tried to think of people who would be capable of helping him remove the skeleton without breaking it.
The only person Tim could think of was Dean, his enemy.
He replied, “ If you’re serious about the skeleton, I’ ll help.”
And to keep the bones together, they tied them with elastic strips.
When they were finished, they had attained a perfect skeleton.
They used plaster to make a mold of the dinosaur’s skull.
They engraved their initials into it and gave it to the curator of a local museum.
Tim and Dean found out that they could work very well together.
By combining their talents, the men became even greater than they were before.
Mmnrwcmr e h e n s i o n PART O  Mark each statement T for true or F for false.
Tim and Dean were outright enemies who got into vicious arguments.
Tim and Dean removed the jagged bones and used elastic to attain them.
Tim couldn’t conceive a plan to remove the bones because the endeavor would be too arduous.
When Tim excavated the land, he uncovered many engraved bones.
What was Tim doing on the periphery of the city?
What did the fossil hunters do to the plaster mold before they gave it to the curator?
What did Dean say before he went to the locale of the terrestrial animal’s skeletal remains?
If someone or something is reputable, then they have a good reputation.
The service from the less than reputable company made her angry.
Vanity is excessive pride or love of one’s own appearance or things one has done.
Her vanity won’t allow her to pass a mirror without looking at herself.
To vie for something means to compete against others for it.
The three boys vied for the prize in the chemistry contest.
If something or someone is vulgar, then they are rude or lacking in style.
Her vulgar behavior got her into trouble with her parents.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
I broke the long piece of fabric that goes over my shoulder on my purse.
Matt’s female appearances made everyone take notice of him immediately.
You must wear proper clothing if you plan on attending the formal dance.
The soft materials in his helmet will protect him if he should fall and strike his head on an object.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
She decided to use some 2______________ to make her cheeks look less pale.
All the girls had to own that style of purse with the yellow 3______________
Though he had a(n) 6______________of money, he gave it to help people.
Will had to 7______________ with other students for the respect of the teacher.
However, once he became a(n) 8______________ student, he stopped studying.
Some people thought the musician’s lipstick made him look 9______________
But others felt that this 10______________ is what made him so popular.
We all felt that the new office rules were completely absurd.
Losing your memory as you get older is called anemia.
A strong smell is the hallmark of a good cheese.
It was easy to get lost in the big house.
The local vanity asked people to give old clothing and money.
After putting on too much rouge, she looked like a clown.
Everyone may attend excess those who have not finished their assignment.
Talking to people with food in your mouth is not only gross.
Because he was an aristocrat, he had to wash dishes in order to make enough money.
Dressed to Excess If you traveled back in time to the 1700s in Europe, you would laugh when you saw how.
Soon you’d realize, though, that the aristocrats of Europe were very serious about their appearance.
Ladies even used pads to enlarge the appearance of their hips and shoulders.
On the other extreme, the aristocratic women made their waists appear extremely thin.
It took several maids stretching fabric and pulling straps in order to get a lady’s waist to the proper thinness.
Pale skin was also a craze, yet this too was done in excess.
Instead, she needed to look as if she had anemia.
In order to look paler, ladies actually cut themselves daily, so they would bleed.
The columns of hair were a ridiculous tangle of wigs, jewels, flowers, and even stuffed birds.
Their shoes had large soles or high heels so that they could walk high above the filth on the streets.
Furthermore, just like the ladies, the men wore lipstick and put rouge on their cheeks.
They were made from the finest of fabrics and decorated with jewels and lace.
The men vied with one another to see who wore the more expensive clothes, for the clothing signified his wealth and status.
Both men and women spent huge amounts of money and time on how they looked.
Though such vanity would seem vulgar today, three hundred years from now, the fashions of our time might also seem completely ridiculous.
Women’s hair was a tangle of wigs, straps, flowers, and stuffed birds.
What craze was done in such excess that women had to look like they had anemia?
When reputable men vied with each other, what were they trying to see?
When they broke open the rock, they saw it was filled with chunks o f gold.
If something is civic, then it is related to a town or city, especially its government.
Most o f the important civic buildings are located downtown.
The din o f the rusty machinery made the factory a horrible place to work.
To overwork someone means to make them tired with too much work.
After working for three weeks with only one day o f rest, Judy was overworked.
It was impossible to get to sleep because my husband snored.
If something is done soundly, then it is done in the best or most complete way.
A superintendent is a person who runs a certain department or building.
The superintendent decided to close the schools because of the weather.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The movement downward from the mountain was because it had started to rain.
A thick, solid piece of dirt was stuck underneath the wagon’s tire.
Please share your suggestions with the department leader so she can address them.
After toiling for hours in the hot sun, the prisoners were tired from too much work.
For her birthday, her boyfriend took her out for a fancy and expensive dinner.
The room just below the roof is on the third floor of the house.
She was respected by many because she was not afraid to say what she thought.
He always dreamed of getting a job with one of the departments of government.
Getting lost in the desert would have been quite an awful experience.
The cat waited outside the door and made a fuss until someone let her inside the house.
See that politician over there? He works in the Ministry of Truth.
The need to protect one’s family is an intrinsic quality found in many animals.
However, if there was someone busier than him, it was his butler.
Hence, while the superintendent slept soundly, snoring loudly in his bed, the butler was still awake.
Sadly, though the butler was always overworked, his profession’s intrinsic nature demanded he never be outspoken.
Therefore, his employer never knew the butler hadn’t slept for several days.
First he went to the attic to get more chairs and tables.
But on his descent, he realized he needed to make the food.
He boiled water in a kettle for soup and chopped some beef into chunks.
Just as he was starting the soup, he remembered that he had to sweep the veranda.
As he was sweeping the veranda, he realized that he had to clean the sauna.
There were not enough chairs for the guests to sit on, and the soup tasted too pungent.
They started to make a fuss, and the party was filled with a din of complaints.
He wondered why his butler had made so many mistakes.
He said, “You should have told me earlier, then we could have avoided this whole ordeal.”
The Superintendent of Civic Projects cleaned late at night; hence, he was busier than his butler.
Though the butler was outspoken, his job’s intrinsic nature made him never become overworked.
This particular party was important because people from the ministry were coming.
The butler boiled caffeine in a kettle and chopped beef into chunks.
On his descent from the attic, what did the butler realize?
Why was the party filled with a din of unhappy guests making a fuss?
The boy felt apologetic after losing his sister’s favorite toy.
Failing a class caused the student a lot o f distress.
To negotiate means to try to make an agreement through discussion.
Mario and Joe took a long time negotiating the contract between the companies.
Persuasion is the act of making someone do or believe something.
The persuasion o f his argument convinced the customer to buy the laptop.
If you knew that a snake was benign, you would probably feel like this: a.
If someone does something with reluctance, how do they feel? a.
What might ensue after someone has misplaced a lot of money? a.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
A Bet Russell finished running a relay and joined his friend Becky in the cafeteria.
The loser has to carry the winner’s books for a year! I’ ll even let you go first.” Becky replied, “ Fine, but to clarify, you’ll carry my books for the entire school year, right?” Russell restated the agreement, “ That’s righ t I’ ll carry your books all year if you.
He gasped and his face alternated between brave and pained expressions.
He was on the verge of tears and finally let out a horrible cry.
Russell was relieved, not only did he learn something new about chilies, but he learned that Becky was a good friend.
The argument ensued because Becky wavered about whether to run the relay.
After Russell and Becky negotiated the bet, they decided that whoever lost would carry the winner’s books for a year.
Russell was wary about eating the pepper even if it looked benign.
Becky was apologetic because of her choice to take the first bite of the pepper.
Why did Becky take the bet in spite of her reluctance?
Why did Russell have to restate the terms of the bet?
How did Becky know that Russell was in distress and had an overdose of spice after he ate the pepper?
If something goes ashore, it goes from water to the land.
After a long day o f fishing, Glen pulled his boat ashore, so it wouldn’t float away.
When something or someone is devoid of a thing, they are missing it.
The movie was devoid o f any violence, so it was a perfect movie for the family.
To fend off something means to push it away and avoid it.
Dave spent all night fending off bugs instead of sleeping.
When something is fictitious, it is made up and not real.
The author said that the characters in her book were completely fictitious.
The car broke down on the road and obstructed traffic for hours.
To prolong means to make something last for a longer time.
Sandy walked slowly across the beach, trying to prolong her lunch break.
If something or someone is vigorous, they use a lot of energy.
How can someone devoid of any happiness be described? a.
Which of the following is NOT used to obstruct sunlight? a.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Human undeveloped babies grow inside the mother for up to nine months.
Hiller had a spare amount of clothes, so she gave them to charity.
The philosopher developed an idea about what happens to good people.
The principal called Alex’s house to make certain he was sick at home.
Margaret collected shells that had come from the water to land on the beach.
Elliot moved down into the water as soon as he arrived at the beach.
Oscar hid behind a tree to not get caught by the bully who was chasing him.
The amount of hair he had on his head was a small amount.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
I obstructed my brother from coming in by locking the door.
I ate a light snack to fend off my hunger.
She didn’t want a lot of people to know about it.
I viewed this morning’s gazette to find out about today’s weather.
Andrew verified that his friends were coming to his house, so his mom could make enough food for dinner.
Class was prolonged because Shelly had a lot of questions.
By the time she was done, school had been over for ten minutes.
Greg didn’t like vigorous exercise, so he played many different sports.
Komodo dragons are giant lizards that grow up to two and a half meters long.
However, it had never been around a male lizard in its entire life.
After the scientists publicized their discovery, many people thought it was fictitious.
It was discovered that female komodo dragons can have babies without the help of their male counterparts.
This contradicts what scientists know about how most animals have babies.
In most cases, there are many things that can obstruct this type of reproduction.
For example, adult males and females carry different genes needed to make an embryo.
If the genes are homogeneous, the babies are weaker and have genetic problems.
This makes it necessary for the male to be involved.
However, scientists verified that when Komodo babies are born, their genes aren’t the exact same genes as their mother.
Scientists theorize that Komodo dragons developed the ability because it helps the species fend off extinction.
If a volcano erupts, lava can kill all of the komodo dragons on an island.
However, as long as one female eludes death, she can prolong the survival of the species.
So the surviving female can plunge into the ocean and swim to another island.
Once again there is a surplus of lizards on one island.
Scientists think that this may be how the lizards took over all of the islands in that area.
People thought that the story publicized in the gazette about the komodo dragons was fictitious.
Female komodo dragons can have babies without their male counterparts.
Scientists verified that baby komodo dragons have homogeneous genes if they don’t have fathers, which leads to genetic problems.
Scientists theorize that the special ability of komodo dragons help them elude predators.
A female komodo dragon can increase a sparse population so that there are surplus lizards on one island.
How do komodo dragons contradict what scientists know about reproduction?
Why is it possible for a komodo dragon to come ashore at a different island?
How can a female komodo dragon prolong the survival of the species in case of a disaster?
According to the passage, what happens to the genes of the population overtime?
What will happen to the komodo bobies if the genes are homogeneous?
Arthritis is an illness causing pain and swelling in a person’s joints.
Agatha couldn’t play the piano anymore because of her arthritis.
Bonnie was gratified after receiving her gift from her parents.
To mash something is to crush it so that it is soft.
We mashed the hard potatoes and served them for dinner.
If something is ornate, it is decorated with a lot of fancy things.
Kim’s prom dress was very expensive since it was so ornate.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The journalist checked all her sources to make sure they were believable.
The hospital had a separate section for very mentally ill people.
The priest stood behind a(n) table used in religious ceremonies.
My dad crushes food for my baby brother because he doesn’t have teeth yet.
People with an ailment affecting the joints are often unable to do physical activities.
Some people think I have future seeing powers, but in reality I’m just very observant.
Cows release so much waste material that some scientists believe they harm the environment.
He didn’t like attending the opera, but he did it to satisfy his mother.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
She went there every day at 4______________to relieve her stress.
If only someone had stopped him from doing his 6______________ crimes.
Before she died, she taught him a lot about gardening and 8____________
The text was written in at least three different ancient languages.
After many years, experts realized it contained a number of spells that varied greatly in scope.
The most common types of magic in the collection dealt with healing illnesses like pneumonia.
Some spells also gave advice for treating people with mental illnesses, such as those who became psychotic.
Many healing spells gave instructions on how to use herbs and plants that were believed to be therapeutic.
For example, in order to cure arthritis, the book says that the magician should build an ornate altar.
Then he should mash different types of herbs and place them on top of it.
At dusk, he is supposed to say a spell, so the gods would be gratified.
Other parts of the collection describe how to hone one’s psychic abilities and how to give credible descriptions of the future.
Often, the book advised people how to use different objects to tell the future, including tea leaves.
Also, one part of the book tells what different dreams might mean.
It gives advice for using dreams to tell the future.
A small part of the book, however, is more sinister than the rest.
For example, one tells how to give someone warts, while another will.
However, if someone’s farm animals died as a result of a curse, he could ask a magician.
The book gave advice for using crocodile dung to heal.
A spell is spoken at dusk to become more credible.
What should someone do if they want to cure arthritis?
What does the sinister part of the book focus on?
What could someone ask a magician to do if their farm animals died?
Intuitive is knowing about something without naturally having support or proof.
Rhonda had an intuitive feeling that Shane wasn’t coming to school today.
A premium is a payment that is higher than average.
Tony paid for premium gas because it made his car run the best.
To propel something means to push or move it somewhere.
The strong wind propelled the leaf through the air and across the street.
To socialize is to have a good time with people.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The meeting of the citizens’ group was prevented from happening by the police.
The warm weather had changed the ice sculptures into strange shapes.
Dad says drinking milk before going to bed helps with a disorder that makes it hard to sleep.
After I saw the scary movie, walking home in the darkness upset me.
After school, I’m likely to go visit my friend at her house.
Dylan believed it to be his special right to be treated as superior to all the others.
A gust of wind blew her scarf over the edge of the boat while she was sailing.
He didn’t know what the proper set of rules about being polite was for returning a gift.
The train was full of clothes that were to be sold overseas.
The wax candle twisted and formed a different shape because it was left in the sun.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
My mother is 3______________ with making sure we impress our guests.
I stepped onto the 5______________ and couldn’t find a seat right away.
Finally, I made my way through the 6______________ aisle and sat down.
Between making deliveries, she liked to 8______________ with the employees.
Since I didn’t clean it up right away, it caused the wooden floor to io_
Allie could always count on her intuitive powers to know where her cat was.
The weatherman said it was liable to rain over the entire weekend, so we decided to go for a picnic on Saturday.
When his teacher returned his test, he forgot about it immediately.
She has seen several doctors, but none have helped her get any more sleep.
Watch Out! Kevin stepped off the tram and walked toward the ship, holding a package tightly in his.
He had been hired as a courier for an important broker.
All he needed to do was deliver a package to an office in New York City; the ship would take him there.
As Kevin walked to his cabin, he saw the exclusive first-class section.
He would have liked to socialize with the people inside, but it was against proper etiquette.
People paid a premium for the privilege to ride in first-class.
Instead, he went to his cabin next to the freight section of the boat.
His room smelled bad, and the floorboards were warped and deformed in some areas.
He could also hear the motor humming as it waited to propel the ship forward.
Suddenly, Kevin was unsettled by something, but he wasn’t sure why.
He took a short walk on the ship’s deck, but he still felt strange.
That night, he suffered from insomnia—he couldn’t suppress his obsessing over how strange he felt.
He looked overboard, but it seemed that everything was all right.
A giant iceberg was sticking out of the ocean in the distance!
People looked at him as if he was crazy, but he continued to shout until he saw the.
The captain saw it and immediately instructed the crew to change the ship’s direction.
Without your help, we would have definitely hit the iceberg.
In order to get the privilege to be in the exclusive section, one had to wear fancy garments.
Kevin didn’t socialize with the people in the exclusive section because it was too congested.
If Kevin hadn’t seen the iceberg, the ship was liable to have crashed into it.
While he was on the ship, what could Kevin hear humming?
What did Kevin see when he looked overboard the first time?
What did the captain do when he heard the news about the iceberg?
What did Kevin learn at the end of the story?
The lack o f care led to the deterioration o f the house.
The way to winning debates is to avoid invalid arguments.
To magnify something means to make it look bigger than it really is.
A microbe is a very small living thing that often makes people sick.
The first step in curing a disease is finding the microbe that causes the disease.
Paralysis is the loss of the ability to move all or part of your body.
His paralysis meant that he had to use a wheelchair to get around.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The old house was full of insects that cause harm.
My brother-in-law always tries to enlarge small problems so that they seem much greater than they really are.
Robinson owned a violent dog that terrified all the children in the neighborhood.
If you eat spicy food at night, it will lead to heartburn.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
Dangerous Bites There are many animals with dangerous bites in the world, but which one is the worst?
Some would say that the elusive short-tailed mamushi has the worst bite.
The snake only goes into homes to chase pests such as mice.
Otherwise, it stays in the fields, where it’s dangerous to people who forage for food there.
If someone stuns it by accidentally stepping on it, it bites to protect itself.
At first, the effects of the bite may seem negligible because it doesn’t cause a lot of bleeding.
However, after a few moments, the venom induces paralysis in the area where the individual was bitten.
If the person doesn’t go to the doctor, they are susceptible to kidney deterioration.
Mother tigers are inseparable from their babies and seem to be the gentlest creatures when they are around their young.
However, if the babies are threatened, the mother tiger’s savage nature prevails.
With strong jaws and the ability to move quickly, the tiger can kill someone with one bite.
That’s because it always tries to bite an important artery when it attacks.
If the artery is ruptured, the victim will bleed to death.
In the mainstream, animal bites are seen as the most dangerous.
In fact, the most dangerous bite might be the human bite.
When scientists magnified the contents in human saliva, they found about three hundred different microbes in it.
The elusive mamushi attacks humans if it is bothered by pests in houses.
When tigers attack, they try to rupture an important artery.
Scientists think that the mainstream idea that human bites are the most dangerous is invalid.
What group of people is at risk for mamushi bites?
A ranger is a person who protects the forest or parks.
Peter wanted to be a ranger because he liked spending time outside.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The accident wasn’t serious, and Ernest was released from the hospital quickly.
My grandfather says that if you have itchy hands, it’s a(n) sign that you’ll receive money soon.
The book’s emotional descriptions taught me that war brings sadness to everyone.
The photograph was perfect except for a tiny mark on the corner.
The child cried loudly because his mother wouldn’t buy him a toy he wanted.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
Because of his job, he was secluded in a cabin in the wilderness.
Anybody else would have taken the dark sky as an omen of a very bad storm, but not Randy.
He had done this job for years, and nothing could stop him.
The snow was starting to pile up high on the mountain.
But Randy had an apparatus to get rid of the snow.
It used dynamite to shake the snow and make the top * layer of snow come down.
As the snow started falling, he thought about returning to the office until the storm stopped, but he decided not to.
It was an avalanche! He started to run, but within seconds, he was knocked sideways and buried by the snow and rubble from an old cabin that had been destroyed.
Randy was just a speck amongst the great pile of snow, but the team found him thanks to his brightly colored jacket.
After a few hours, Randy woke up in the hospital.
He looked at the sober faces of the doctors and saw his wife sobbing.
The experience had taught him a poignant lesson: he was a mortal, and nature was much more.
Randy had an apparatus that moved snow sideways to help avoid avalanches.
Randy was seen by the aerial rescue team thanks to his brightly colored jacket.
According to the doctor, Randy was lucky to be alive after the avalanche.
What did Randy see when he woke up after the avalanche?
How long was it before Randy was discharged from the hospital?
A civilian is someone who is not in the military.
It was Todd’s job to keep civilians from entering the army facility.
To disclose something means to tell it to someone else.
John came home late, so he had to disclose his activities to his wife.
Who is a person with the power to authorize a war? a.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
He was amazed by all the places that the Romans took over.
The teacher understood the dynamics between instructors and students in the classroom.
Mariah enrolled the clothes and put them in her drawer.
The Lydian King King Croesus was once one of the richest kings in the world.
One day, a messenger disclosed some interesting news: political unrest in Persia had weakened the empire.
But King Croesus understood the dynamics of war better than most.
He decided that it would be a good time to try to beat the Persians while they were weak.
Then he asked a wise member of the senate who was visiting from Athens.
The sage didn’t say whether he should attack the Persians or not.
He only warned him that his good luck wouldn’t last.
Finally, King Croesus sent a messenger to visit the Oracle, a special lady who could see % the future.
The messenger gave the Oracle jugs of wine and baskets of lentils in orderto make her happy.
When the messenger came back, he was in a festive mood.
The king marshaled his troops and prepared them for a war with Persia.
Their morale was high because they were sure they would win.
After a few months of fighting, it was obvious that the Oracle’s prophecy had come true: by attacking the Persians, King Croesus had destroyed a great empire—his own! King Croesus should have considered the advice more carefully.
People were envious of King Croesus because he understood the dynamics of war better than anybody else.
The messenger disclosed that the Persians were in a state of unrest.
The sage man from the senate was the only one that shared the king’s sentiment.
The messenger gave the Oracle jugs of wine and baskets of lentils to make her happy.
The Oracle’s prophecy was that the Lydian conquest of Persia would be successful.
Why was the messenger in a festive and jolly mood when he returned from seeing the Oracle?
How did King Croesus feel after he heard the Oracle’s prophecy?
How did the civilians who enrolled and were marshaled in the Lydian army feel about the war?
To adorn something means to make it more beautiful by decorating it.
Housekeeping is the maintenance of a house or an establishment like a hotel.
Housekeeping is not much fun, but it has to be done.
Slate is a dark grey rock that can easily be split into layers.
The roof o f the church was made o f slate.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The large pile of dirt covered most of the backyard.
I don’t think we have enough wood used for building furniture to complete the project.
We’ ll have to install a new device that attaches to a tube to control the flow of liquid.
I got a small muscle pain in my leg after having a long workout at the gym.
To reach the TV, the young girl stood on the seat with legs but no arm support.
A high examination score is a proof of the existence of good studying skills.
The man became worried when his arm was without feeling.
He was hired to repair the house that had become old and in bad condition.
I hope we do not have to say farewells to the bus to school.
The teacher was proud of the filth  her students achieved in class.
After the initial pain of droppingthe hammer on my toe, it went numb.
He was not looking forward to cleaning the huge mound of dirty dishes in the sink.
The scared child felt bliss and cried for his mother.
Fossil evidence is a testament to the immense size of dinosaurs.
The reckless climber took every precaution to insure a safe climb.
The weather report says slate will fall for the next three days.
The mother grinned when her child scored the winning run in the baseball game.
The timber was a nice addition to our breakfast meal.
He took off his shoes and leaned back into the comfortable stool.
The movie was great because it evoked strong feelings in viewers.
You can get hot or cold water from this faucet.
The Butler Greta was an elderly lady who lived alone in a huge, dilapidated mansion.
It was covered with filth, and most of the furniture was broken.
Plus, the kitchen sink leaked water all over the floor.
Greta was too old to do housekeeping and repairs herself, so she hired a butler named Gordon.
His muscles were a testament to his strong work ethic.
He believed that if he worked hard, great things would happen for him.
On his first day, he worked for hours cleaning and making repairs.
He tightened the valve underneath the kitchen faucet to stop the leak.
He even bought timber to build new stools for the kitchen.
He worked so hard that his fingers went numb, and he got cramps in his shoulders.
She never expressed thanks or said that he did a good job.
But he decided the right thing to do was to keep working hard.
One day, while Gordon was sweeping, Greta said, “ Gordon! I have a surprise for you!” He went to Greta’s room and saw.
It looked just like him! It was adorned with a banner that read: “Welcome home.”
I’m so thankful for your hard work that I want you to have it.
He said, “ I’m in bliss! My hard work really paid off!”
The two said their farewells, and Gordon spent the afternoon admiring his beautiful new home.
Gordon tightened the valve under the kitchen faucet and bought timber to build stools.
Why did Greta hire a butler to do the housekeeping and repairs?
Why did Gordon’s shoulders get cramps and his fingers become numb?
What was written on the banner that adorned the slate statue?
What did Gordon say when he grinned and felt bliss?
To counteract something means to act against it in order to reduce or stop it.
To diagnose someone means to identify the medical condition they have.
Several o f the children were diagnosed with the flu.
A federation is a group of states or businesses working for a common cause.
The United Nations is a federation designed to prevent war, disease, and famine.
A rash is an infected area of the skin with redness, bumps, itching, or dryness.
The new perfume left a horrible rash on my skin.
To render something means to make it become something else.
His report was rendered unimportant by the release o f new information.
To vow means to make a promise to do something.
Before they are allowed to work, all senators must vow to never accept bribes.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The new law will make the schools less effective at teaching certain subjects.
Some countries have a larger population of poor citizens than other countries do.
The teachers collected the names of all the students who passed the test in her book.
If you touch that plant, you might get a sore and infected area of skin that itches badly.
The doctor identified her illness as being only a mild stomach flu.
I don’t like those kinds of movies because they have scenes that are really disgusting.
Many diseases are passed from one person to another when they shake hands.
The companies agreed that it would be cheaper to ship the fruit if they formed a group.
Her treatment of the patients was good and kind, and they seemed to heal much faster.
The two artists decided to work together on their next series of sculptures.
The End of Smallpox Smallpox was once the most deadly disease in the world.
At the onset of smallpox, people suffered from high fevers, headaches, vomiting, and aching muscles.
Yet the worst symptom of all was an intolerable rash that caused irritation on the entire body.
Those who survived the disease were often rendered blind or left with gross scars on their face and body.
Today, however, cases of smallpox are very rare due to the work of many countries during the late 1900s.
Early in the century, wealthy countries in Europe and North America had developed a substance that made the body immune to smallpox.
They had required all their citizens to get this vaccine to counteract the disease.
Hence, the people of these countries no longer had to worry about smallpox.
However, many of the needy people in poorer parts of the world still suffered from the disease.
Their countries could not afford the vaccine nor supply enough doctors to curb the spread of smallpox.
In 1950, the wealthier countries of the world vowed to free the world of the disease.
They pledged to supply the vaccine to any country that could not afford it.
Scientists compiled lists of areas where the disease still thrived.
Then doctors diagnosed people who had the disease in these areas.
They enacted laws that prohibited people with smallpox from mixing with those who did not.
In this way, they could not transmit the disease to others.
But nearly thirty years later, on December 9,1979, a group of scientists certified that smallpox had been successfully stopped.
The humane efforts of people from all over the world had accomplished a great task.
Smallpox rendered people bald and caused an intolerable rash that left gross scars.
Laws were enacted to prohibit sick people from mixing with healthy people.
The wealthier countries pledged to give North America a vaccine to counteract smallpox.
The humane efforts of people everywhere helped to successfully stop smallpox.
What did people suffer from at the onset of smallpox?
What did the federation of countries collaborate in order to do?
Why couldn’t the needy peoples’ countries curb the spread of smallpox?
What did doctors do to help reduce the spread of smallpox?
Who certified that smallpox had been stopped in December of 1979?
Mark took a moment to contemplate the math problem before solving it.
To contend with something means to struggle to overcome it.
Stacy had to contend with a learning disability throughout high school.
In their final year at school, the students were asked to enlist in the military.
A frontier is a border between two regions or countries.
A fence was built along the frontier where the river curved.
If something is lush, then it is full of a variety of large, healthy plants.
The lush jungle was filled with plants, trees, and vines.
Marrow is the soft substance in the center of bones.
A paw is an animal’s foot that has claws or soft bottoms.
Jane was weary after a long day o f work.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
At first, he didn’t know to which animal the 1______________’s print belonged.
But after he looked it up in the 2______________, he knew what it was.
After he was done signing the papers, he dressed in his new 4______________
Because the forest was so 7______________, it was dark inside even during the day.
So, in order to see the path, the explorers had to light their 8______________
He 9______________ how to get the stains out of his favorite suit.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
The loud music kept me awake most of last night.
The pages in the book were quivering with sheer horror.
You can tell that the bones are old because they don’t have any marrow left in them.
We often contend with each other for our parents’ attention.
After the meal, Father strayed the bill, and we left.
He parked the car in the cot but didn’t notice he was on the wrong street.
I had to contemplate what I was going to do with my life.
He enlisted in the army because he thought the military.
And though he needed courage, he never imagined how he would learn it.
During a march across a tract of wilderness near his country’s frontier, Tom strayed from his squad.
He had stopped to gaze at a splendid view of a lush valley.
He searched for them, but because their outfits had camouflage, he couldn’t find them.
All he had was a knife, a boomerang, and his handbook.
Instead, he made a fire, wrapped himself tightly in his jacket, and fell asleep.
An animal of substantial size had left a print from its paw in the dirt.
He sat closer to the fire and looked into the darkness.
He imagined a large beast jumping from the gloom and.
He shook so much from fear that it felt like the marrow in his bones quivered.
He decided to stay by the fire, but during his vigil, he heard more noises.
He heard a twig snap very close ahead, but he bravely went on.
He learned that he had to confront his fear in order to conquer it.
Tom strayed from his squad to gaze at a splendid view of a lush forest near the frontier.
Tom couldn’t find his squad on the tract of wilderness because their outfits had camouflage.
All Tom had with him was his cot, a boomerang, and his handbook.
A monster of substantial size left a print from its paw in the dirt near Tom’s fire.
What caused Tom to shake so much that the marrow in his bones quivered?
Though he contemplated many plans, he was hesitant to act.
During his vigil, what could Tom not contend with any longer?
To adhere means to act in the way that a rule or agreement says is right.
If  the new employees wish to succeed, they must adhere to the boss’s rules.
To contaminate something means to put dirty or harmful chemicals into it.
The lake was contaminated when pollutants entered into the water.
An epidemic is an outbreak of a disease that spreads quickly.
A hazard is something that could be dangerous to a person’s health or safety.
Intestines are tubes through which food passes after it leaves the stomach.
When something is sterile, it is completely clean and free from germs.
Which of the following is the most serious to have a deficiency of? a.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
They need to improve and make more efficient the medical devices in the hospital.
To save the boy, rushing into the burning house is extremely important and must be done.
Handing out rain jackets was a necessary act of giving.
Sometimes, cold weather can be made visible or obvious in the most unlikely places.
The theory seems capable of doing what it needs to do to me.
You must act in a wav that is right according to the rules of the game.
Joining the choir will be an action that is done by choice.
The amusement park was no fun because it was occupied by too many people.
Who is going to take responsibility for organizing the protest?
The criminal was certainly not feeling pity or sympathy for suffering people.
Epidemic in Zimbabwe In August of 2008, a deadly cholera epidemic manifested in Zimbabwe.
There was an extreme lack of clean drinking water in the overcrowded urban cities.
Garbage and chemicals got into the public water supplies and contaminated them.
Since people did not have access to other sources, they had to drink the dirty water.
It also caused a deficiency of important fluids in sick people’s bodies.
Without the proper fluids and minerals, metabolic processes stopped working correctly.
People were unable to digest food properly or replenish their lost nutrients.
If they had not received viable treatment, they would have been likely to die.
However, the government of Zimbabwe was unable to provide help to its people.
The government didn’t have a plan to stop the spread of cholera.
In addition, the country was too poor to get clean water or medication for the sick.
Luckily, many other countries recognized the paramount need to contain the outbreak.
Dozens of voluntary practitioners from Britain, France, the United States, and other countries went to Zimbabwe to treat the disease.
Through the provision of sterile drinking water and medication, people finally got the treatment they badly needed.
The compassionate doctors were able to save the lives of thousands.
By january of 2009, the epidemic was almost completely contained.
Today, the Zimbabwean government is working with other countries to prevent future epidemics.
They are cleaning up the water supply and learning how to avoid health hazards.
The government now administers the water supply plants and makes sure that they adhere to strict safety guidelines.
Hopefully, future instances of cholera will be treated before they start deadly epidemics.
The health hazard was a lack of sterile drinking water in overcrowded urban cities.
A deficiency of contaminated water caused metabolic processes to stop working correctly.
The government now administers water supply plants to make sure they adhere to guidelines.
What were infected people unable to replenish in their intestines?
If something is amid something else, then it is in the middle of it.
The bee was busily flying amid the flowers in the garden.
If something happens backstage, it occurs behind a theater’s stage.
After the show, the director went backstage and thanked the actors.
To evacuate means to leave a place of danger to a place of safety.
During the flood, many families were evacuated to higher ground.
A satire is a work of art that uses humor and irony to make fun of something.
This book is a satire o f what life was like in the army.
To subject someone to something means to force them to do or experience it.
The officers subjected everyone to a careful search before they left the plane.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
When they canceled the show, there was a great 1______________ from the crowd.
It was so loud that the actors could hear it 2______________
The rags were very 4______________and would help start the fire.
I wouldn’t 5______________ that man’s class just by the way he talks and dresses.
It might have been 7_____________ of her to walk so soon after the operation.
Her movements were very 8______________ , and she might have hurt herself.
One group was innocent people, and the other was the 10_____
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
When we heard the phone collide, we thought it was our uncle calling us.
We whispered very quietly in all the tumult, or someone might have easily heard us.
The women loved the brute because he was so kind and gentle.
My brother was one of the angry people in the mob that day.
Her father had to testify in court about the car accident he saw.
I tried to solve the math problem several times and finally resented it in the morning.
He has several large homes and his own airplane because he’s a billionaire.
The Brute and the Billionaire Hundreds of people had come to see a popular satire, but during the performance a fire.
Luckily, no one was hurt, and the fire was soon put out.
Immediately, the audience assembled into an angry mob and demanded to know what had happened.
It was soon revealed that the fire had started backstage, and only two people were in the area at the time.
One was the husband of the play’s star actress, the billionaire Henry Rich.
The other was the theater’s janitor, Bill, a large and strong man who looked like a brute.
The crowd segregated the two men and demanded to know who the culprit was.
Most of the crowd thought that Bill was to blame.
They felt that he had started the fire without ever subjecting him to any scrutiny.
I fell down amid the tumult while everyone fled the fire.
Bill rescued me and carried me out of the building.
I admit that I started the fire, but it was an accident.
I was going backstage to see my wife and was clumsy.
I collided with a lamp, and it fell to the floor.
The man they blamed was innocent, and the billionaire was guilty.
To pay for his error, the billionaire not only repaired the theater but had it remade to be better than before.
The billionaire and the play’s star actress were the only two people backstage.
Because Henry looked like a brute, the crowd underestimated his character.
The billionaire fell down amid the tumult while everyone fled the fire.
The crowd made an uproar when they learned who had started the fire.
Why did the actors and audience have to evacuate the theater?
When the mob segregated the two men, who did they first think was the culprit?
Who testified in the Bill’s defense since the mob didn’t subject him to any scrutiny?
What was the flammable object that caught fire when Mr.
Because their decision was premature, what was the mob surprised to learn in the end?
A defect is a part of something that is wrong or missing.
All these bottles have a defect and must be sent back to the warehouse.
If something or someone is innovative, they can think in creative ways.
Since Peter was so innovative, he was chosen to lead the science team.
To simulate something means to copy its actions or characteristics.
The French language teacher could simulate the accent o f a French citizen.
To stimulate something means to cause or to increase activity in it.
Doctors sometimes use electric shock to stimulate a patient’s heartbeat.
If someone is tenacious, then they do not easily give up.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
You can hear because sound causes activity in the tiny hairs on the inside of your ear.
Some worms are small enough to enter into the skin without being detected.
She tried to copy the way her best friend dressed.
The teacher offered the kids candy in order to urge them into finishing their homework.
In science class, we learned about the particles in atoms that have a negative electric charge.
Every time the children’s fort fell down, they built it again and better.
She took classes in the science that studies the weather and became a weatherperson.
The small airplane flew without any effort through the sky.
A rocket requires a lot of fuel in order to start it into the sky.
Amanda is quite an intelligent girl for her young age.
Just when you thought you’d caught up to Brian, he’d accelerate and quickly get away.
The orchestra made a very tenacious sound, and many in the audience decided to leave.
They can glide through the air to capture their prey.
They had a picnic in the park and launched on small sandwiches and grapes.
We made a small toy train that stimulated how real trains worked 100 years ago.
Cellular phones are one of the most popular innovations in the world today.
The thought of his warm bed spurred the traveler on through the cold night.
Some metals are attracted to other metals due to an electromagnetic force.
Certain kinds of light can simulate flowers into producing seeds earlier than usual.
He hasn’t passed a single test so far this year.
Everyone who voted in the electron was given the day off of work.
The Tenacious Inventor A young student of meteorology was having a difficult time with an experiment.
It worked by releasing an electromagnetic pulse into the cloud.
This pulse, in turn, stimulated the electrons in the cloud’s particles.
He had tied it to balloons, but they had burst.
He had shot the device from a cannon, but the force of the cannon had damaged it.
He attached wings to the device, and on one dreary day, when clouds blocked the light of the sun, he started his experiment anew.
He placed the device on a rocket and launched it into the sky.
The propulsion of the rocket carried the device high into the air.
The rocket accelerated into the clouds and then released the device.
It glided on its wings through the clouds, and when it penetrated the center of a large black cloud, it emitted the electromagnetic pulse.
And just as he had predicted, lightning shot from the cloud!
He called his professors, and the next day they came to watch.
His teachers were extremely impressed and called the student and his invention ingenious.
The student was given many awards and became a famous inventor.
The student of meteorology had bought a device that simulated lightning in clouds.
The electromagnetic pulse stimulated the electrons in the cloud’s particles.
The student’s friends’ criticisms spurred him to try his experiment anew.
It was a dreary day when the device glided into the clouds.
The propulsion of the rocket accelerated the speed of the lightning.
What innovation did the innovative student use to launch his device into the clouds?
What did the device do when it finally penetrated the center of a large black cloud?
A freeway is a road with no stops where cars travel at high speeds.
Once you get on the freeway, it only takes an hour to drive to my parent’s farm.
The monks at this monastery are famous for their bread and music.
A parcel is a package of things to be carried or mailed somewhere.
The parcel looked like it had been stepped on by someone.
To zip something means to close it with a zipper.
She zipped her backpack closed after putting her books inside it.
Who is someone that would most likely be hospitable? a.
If the mist from fog condensed, what would happen to the ground? a.
If you are going on a trip, which is something you should do beforehand? a.
Who of the following would most likely perform a concerto? a.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
They didn’t want to get covered with sand, so they relaxed on an extended blanket.
The boys were talking quickly about what they were going to do that weekend.
It’s easy to go past the exit when you’re driving on the road where cars drive fast.
This building used to be a house where monks lived, but now it’s used as a museum.
The twisting path that went through the mountains was beautiful to hike in the spring.
Their chances of escaping the room became worse as the water level continued to rise.
The outside surface of the car looked bad, but the inside still looked new.
I had never before met such a cheerful, talkative person.
The Nurse’s Lesson One of the children in the nursery was sick.
She knew that if she did not act quickly, the child’s condition would deteriorate.
The nurse immediately hurried from the manor to get the medicine.
The monastery was far away by Rabbit Cove, and there was no freeway leading to it.
The only way there was to walk along a dark and winding trail.
The temperature was close to zero degrees centigrade, and it was raining.
She zipped it up and pulled the hood over her head.
The rain had condensed on the exterior of the windows by the door.
All she could see was the profile of a large man coming to answer the door.
But the monk smiled at her when he opened the door.
He took her outstretched hand and welcomed her with a hearty voice.
The place was warm, and she heard a concerto playing in another room.
He grabbed a parcel of medicine and took her back to the.
Now the boy would be able to live a long natural life.
The nurse was usually a vivacious woman who constantly chattered.
The nursery was far from the freeway that was near Rabbit Cove.
When it started to deteriorate, the nurse zipped up the jacket she had brought beforehand.
When the nurse heard a concerto playing in another room, she became hospitable.
Who took the nurse’s outstretched hand and welcomed her with a hearty voice?
How did the nurse feel when she saw the profile of a man coming to answer the door?
What had condensed on the exterior of the monastery’s windows?
What was in the parcel that the nurse took back to the manor?
The Almighty is a name for a god in a religion.
An advent is the arrival or beginning of an important person, thing, or event.
During the advent o f radio, very few programs actually played music.
To equate one thing with another is to compare them and consider them very similar.
She equated the man’s messy appearance with a lack o f responsibility.
To inhale means to take air or a smell into the lungs.
The camper inhaled the cool and fresh mountain air and felt relaxed.
To invoke something is to mention it to support an argument or ask for help.
Before going into battle, the soldier invoked the name of his god for protection.
If something is psychiatric, then it is related to mental illness or its treatment.
The doctor said the patient might have a psychiatric problem.
Studying psychiatry has taught me a lot about mental illness.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
A dipper is a(n) 6______________ shaped like a spoon used for getting water.
There are many methods used in 7______________ to help cure mental illnesses.
They are all 8______________ to the specific needs of the patient.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The coach designed to their unique needs a program for each of the athletes.
Jack’s parents had a weekly meeting with his teacher to discuss Jack’s schoolwork.
If you look at that group of stars in the sky, what do you see?
The priest asked the god to bless everyone in the church.
She compared the pain in her back to being stabbed with a knife.
Seizures Then and Now If a person who lived 200 years ago was treated for a seizure today, they would be.
That’s because doctors in the 1800s were influenced more by primal medical beliefs than science.
Rather than thinking the brain caused seizures, people in the 180' still thought they were the result of strange forces.
Others felt that the seizures had a cosmic or lunar cause.
They believed that the cycles of the moon and constellations could make someone have a seizure.
During a session to treat a patient who had seizures, doctors would force the patient to invoke the grace of the Almighty.
They thought if the patient did this, then the patient would rid themselves of the evil spirits causing the seizures.
At that time people who suffered from seizures were placed in psychiatric hospitals.
It wasn’t until the late 1850s that the causes of seizures were understood.
We know today that these causes pertain to the brain.
Misfired signals from the brain cause a jerking reflex in the body.
Once the causes of seizures were known, definitive treatments were developed.
Treatment is personalized according to the type of seizure the patient has.
Their most common mistake is thinking that a person having a seizure will swallow their tongue.
The utensil often blocks the airway and prevents the person from inhaling.
Yet most of the public no longer fear people who have seizures.
Instead, they can now help and comfort a person if they have a seizure.
Doctors who treated patients for seizures in the 1800s were influenced by primal medical beliefs.
Doctors still used outmoded treatments even after definitive treatments were developed.
The cause of seizures used to be equated to the work of the Almighty.
Today, care for people with seizures is better because treatment sessions are more personalized.
The cause of seizures pertain to misfired signals in the brain that cause a jerking reflex in the body.
How does a utensil placed in someone’s airway prevent them from inhaling?
During the advent of modern psychiatry, how were people treated in psychiatric hospitals?
What did some people believe constellations and lunar cycles could cause?
What did doctors force seizure patients to invoke in order to treat their seizures?
A mentor is a person with experience or knowledge who advises someone.
The students each chose a mentor to help them with the experiment.
A phoenix is an imaginary bird that burned to ashes and was reborn.
Some believe the phoenix is a symbol for rebirth and a new beginning.
Photosynthesis is the process in which plants change sunlight and air.
The chemical in plants that makes them green is used in photosynthesis.
Pollen is the tiny yellow powder made in the flowers of plants.
During the spring, the pollen in the air makes some people become sick.
A beautiful swarm o f butterflies filled the summer sky.
To tickle someone is to touch them in a way that causes laughter.
The mother tickled the little boy’s foot, and he screamed with laughter.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
He enjoyed watching the 1______________ movement of the branch in the wind.
As the branch moved to and 2______________, he felt calmed.
The bird’s feathers were always a(n) 4______________mix of red and orange.
Actually, those flowers have a(n) 5______________ effect on my mother’s health.
Roth had been a valuable 7______________ for so many years.
You could feel the knowledge from the 8______________of his wrinkled hands.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
In order to get into the sports arena, we had to pay a phoenix.
She dumped the dirty water out back in the garden.
My level of Spanish is only at the intermediate stage.
The Greedy Bee A young bee had passed his intermediate level exams.
He understood how they used photosynthesis to make oxygen and which ones produced the best pollen.
From the beginning of time, bees’ eternal task was to gather pollen and make honey with it.
Since he passed his exams, the little bee had earned his inclusion in the swarms that gathered pollen.
He was excited because he was finally allowed to leave the hive.
He left with the next swarm and was determined to find the perfect flower.
Soon he saw a large, vibrant flower full of pollen.
He landed on a petal and walked toward the pollen at the flower’s center.
Immediately, he began rolling in the pollen, gathering it on his legs and wings.
The fine texture of the pollen tickled when it stuck to his body.
It was the best experience the little bee had ever had.
But when he was flying back home, he realized that all the pollen had an adverse effect.
One minute he was flying straight, and the next minute the wind had reversed his course.
He tried to dump some of the pollen, but it acted as an adhesive.
Just then, his mentor landed next to him and began cleaning the excess pollen off the little bee.
Finally, with the pollen off of him, the bee easily regained his strength, and like a phoenix, the young bee flew back into the air.
Rea d i n g  C o m p r e h e n s i o n.
The texture of the petals in the vibrant flower tickled.
The little bee was blown to and fro and reversed in his direction.
Because the pollen acted like an adhesive, the little bee couldn’t dump it.
After his mentor helped him regain his strength, the little bee lost his ambitions and fell to the ground like a phoenix.
After the intermediate exams, what did the bee know about photosynthesis?
What did his inclusion in the swarms finally allow the little bee to do?
How did the excess pollen have an adverse effect on the bee’s flight?
To abolish something means to put an end to it, such as a system or law.
A charter is a document that describes the rights of an organization or group.
The company charter explained that all employees had to pay a tax.
If one is lame, they cannot walk properly due to an injury to the leg or foot.
The terrible accident left many people dead and several others lame.
When a behavior is pathological, it is extreme, unacceptable, and uncontrollable.
The pathological liar could not even tell the truth about unimportant matters.
When I realized what I did, I felt remorse for my actions.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
His moving speech caused a huge strong, sudden expression of happy tears.
The main goal of the group was to distribute information about the needs of the poor.
The wounded soldier had to walk with difficulty because of a hurt foot back to the base.
We excitedly watched the results of the survey in which people give opinions.
The boys have a strong desire to finish college in less than three years.
When he saw how badly things had turned out, he felt a strong feeling of sadness and regret.
It is a difficult process to improve the official rulebook.
Those salesmen praise in an insincere wav people to trick them into buying useless items.
The document of principles for the government was based on freedom for all people.
We were immediately suspicious of the boy because of his act of keeping things secret.
The trance was a beautiful arrangement of fruits and flowers on the table.
The doctor had to amend the man’s lungs to help him breathe better.
The new country created a strong constitution to help guide it through the years.
The Mayor of Sherman The cosmopolitan city of Sherman needed to elect a new mayor.
He was a phenomenal speaker, and the citizens loved him.
He was a pathological liar who merely flattered people with his words.
But he was an expert on politics and knew what was best for the people.
The citizens of Sherman didn’t care about what the politicians had to say.
But when he took office, he didn’t know what to do! He tried to hide his ignorance by working in secrecy.
He added a law to the city’s constitution that prevented citizens.
Jones’s law, and he was willing to talk openly with everyone.
He tackled important issues and amended unfair laws in the city’s charter.
The citizens learned that a pleasant appearance and nice words do not make a good leader.
The most important qualities are intelligence and a desire to help others.
Rea d i n g  C o m p r e h e n s i o n.
Jones was a pathological speaker who flattered people with his words.
Webb tackled important issues and amended unfair laws in the city charter.
Jones censored newspapers that tried to disseminate outbursts of anger.
What did the polls predict after the people were put into a trance?
What misguided decision did the people feel remorse for making?
A patriot is someone who loves, supports, and defends their country.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
No matter how much she begged, the older girls still did not accept Suzy.
Language based approaches are the best way to learn about a culture.
Constant changes were weakening the project’s chances of being finished on time.
The boy made a serious and honest promise to his parents that he would never again cheat.
The movie director gave the actors and actresses a personal and original view of the newly completed movie.
But no one knew he was able to speak it very well.
The teacher was waiting for one of the students to be honest about what had happened on the playground.
The Internet has made talking to people everywhere very natural.
As a result, having a sense of common support for your ideas is easy.
Though he looked Greek, his identity based on the country he came from was Mexican.
If you like ethnic foods, then you like foods from other cultures.
Though it’s the same language, there are linguistic differences between the two areas.
If you want someone to care for your cattle, you should call a coward.
The boy said that the test was unfair, and his classmates showed solidarity and agreed.
The king said the princes had undermined his authority when they issued new orders.
The road going to the farmhouse is monolingual, so watch cars coming your way.
If someone goes to court, then they are judged by the legislature.
His friends had left him alone in the library, but he didn’t mind being solemn.
The criminals were prosecuted for the crimes they had committed.
The mothers covered their children’s heads because the rain was so fluent.
I liked all the cars, but I bought the racial car because it was the fastest.
The Editor’s Choice A newspaper editor sat at his desk and stared at the flashing cursor on his computer’s.
He didn’t know if he should delete the article he had just written or go ahead and publish it.
The empire had passed a new law stating that citizens could only use the imperial language.
The editor disagreed with the law and decided to write an article about why it was wrong.
He felt that the new law excluded people of different nationalities and racial and ethnic backgrounds.
He had firsthand knowledge of what it feels like not to be fluent in the imperial language because he was from a remote part of the empire.
He felt that the empire shouldn’t be monolingual and should be more inclusive.
Yet he was afraid that he would get in trouble for having this belief.
Many would say that he was not a patriot—that he didn’t love the empire.
But he didn’t wish to undermine the authority of the empire.
He wanted to argue that the empire could be stronger if it accepted people of various cultures and beliefs.
At last, he decided to stop being a coward and to be earnest about how he felt.
It wasn’t rude or angry, but rather, very solemn and intelligent.
The next day it was published in all the papers.
Everyone was impressed by his tact and showed solidarity with his ideas.
He expected to be arrested any day, but the police never came.
The legislature changed the law, and people from many linguistic backgrounds praised him.
The editor felt the imperial law excluded people of different nationalities and racial and ethnic backgrounds.
The legislature prosecuted the editor for undermining the authority of the empire.
Everyone was impressed by the editor’s tact and showed solidarity with his ideas.
The article wasn’t solemn and intelligent, but rather rude and angry.
Where was the editor sitting when the cursor was ready to delete his article?
After the editor decided not to be a coward but be earnest, what did he do?
If the empire accepted other languages, what did the editor think would happen?
Why was the editor afraid to say that the empire should be more inclusive?
If something moves clockwise, it moves in a circle in the same direction as a clock.
When circles or rings are concentric, they have the same center.
To generate something means to cause it to develop or begin.
The mayor promised to generate new jobs and programs to help the poor.
When something is glacial, it relates to large masses of ice that move slowly.
A locker is a small cabinet with a lock where people store their possessions.
To pierce something means to make a hole in it using a sharp object.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
No one else can open my small cabinet with a lock.
How can we prevent argument and disagreement in the future?
The brave travelers were not stopped by the snow storm with strong winds.
The organizers made sure that the parade was reJated to many different cultures.
The thief hid the money in a small hole in the wall.
I thought the hosts showed a lot of politeness and respect for others.
It was her job to make sure everything was being done properly on the project.
What can we do to cause the beginning or development of interest in our product?
People cannot withstand extremely cold temperatures without clothing and shelter.
John used a knife to make a hole in the thick rubber.
The doctor pierced his skin with the needle to draw blood.
The scientist tried to replicate the experiment and compare the results.
The cavity quickly traveled down the stream and to the lake.
School was cancelled today because of the horrible blizzard outside.
After a brief interchange of ideas, we were ready to begin the new project.
Make sure to include an omission of our goals in the presentation.
The charity raised money for all of the wavy children in the city.
Tim was chosen to oversee the progress of the building crew.
The glacial dog loved to run and chase the ball in the park.
We need to generate a new plan because this one isn’t going to work.
The mother was disappointed with the extreme courtesy her children displayed.
Seats will be allocated to the people who are the first to arrive.
The Ice House Last year, Erik constructed one of the world’s strangest houses in the glacial landscape.
He called it the Ice House: a house made entirely of ice and snow.
All of the beds, chairs, tables, and walls are cold, hard sculptures of ice.
A group of architects and volunteers from all over the world traveled to the site of the Ice House and began its construction.
The multicultural group journeyed through blizzards and frigid temperatures to reach the site.
Once the builders arrived, there was an interchange of ideas, and tools were allocated to each worker.
An expert was selected to oversee the building process to make sure there was no discord between the workers.
Once a plan was generated, they got right to work.
The design was very unique; the builders couldn’t replicate the design from normal houses.
The first step was to build the walls and ceiling.
The builders used a metal frame to help them build the structure.
After the ice was in place, the frame was removed.
One worker carved big wavy lines, and another made tiny clockwise, concentric circles.
Finally, the workers carved small cavities in the roof and inserted colored lights.
When the work was finished, the beautiful house was ready for a resident to enjoy.
Living in the Ice House is an experience like no other.
Erik stores his belongings in an ice locker and lays out a sleeping bag on his ice bed.
At dinner, he dines on a delicious salad with crisp toppings.
And for the main course, he enjoys appetizing fish caught from a nearby river.
The fish are pierced with icicles and served on ice plates.
The omission of heaters can be too much for his visitors sometimes.
Luckily, there are warm rooms nearby, as a courtesy to ^
A multicultural group traveled through blizzards and frigid temperatures to reach the site.
Erik dines on crisp, appetizing fish that are pierced with icicles.
The expert who oversaw the process made sure there wasn’t discord in the glacial landscape.
One worker carved big wavy lines, and another made tiny clockwise, concentric circles.
What was allocated to the workers after an interchange of ideas?
What is provided as a courtesy when guests get too cold?
To justify something means to show or prove that it is necessary.
The government tried to justify its decision to bring the country into a war.
Output is the amount of something that a person or thing produces.
The boss hired more workers to increase the factory’s output of products.
To subsist means to have the food, water, and money needed to stay alive.
Some people are forced to subsist on only a few dollars a month.
Which one of these uses a product made from petroleum? a.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
The dramatic increase of people into the city led to 3______________
The mother was worried that her child’s bad behavior was 5______________
She decided on some new rules to which her child had to 6______________ by.
But the machines used to make them also let out harmful 8______________
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The best theory was the one that was a combination of all the scientist’s ideas.
When the power went out, he was forced to stop or delay progress on his project.
The brothers believe along with other people to the opinion that socialism is best.
The cutting tool was just a new machine not ready to be made in large amounts.
Her job was to get all of the goods ready to sell to other countries.
The chemist demonstrated the change into a different form of liquid water into gas.
After the tornado, it was difficult for the family to have the food and money needed to live.
The mechanic yelled when he stepped on the sharp small amount of metal.
It is the policeman’s job to make sure people do what is right by the law.
We’ ll have to postpone our vacation until next month.
I tried to cram all of my clothes into one suitcase.
The machine’s output was so great that we ran out of room to store the products.
Preparing ofthe Future Overpopulation is a big problem in the world today.
Many people worry that the Earth won’t have enough resources to support so many people.
One major reason for this is that wasting resources and polluting have become habitual behaviors.
Industrial output results in polluting the air with dangerous fumes.
Also, cars and machines waste a ton of important natural resources like oil and water.
It’s possible that the Earth may become so damaged that it cannot support a large population of humans.
Another issue is the lack of useful land for cultivating crops.
Even today, many people subsist on mere scraps of food and little water.
In 50 years, many experts worry that huge numbers of people will starve to death.
So what is being done to prepare for the future?
People are realizing they can no longer justify their wasteful behavior or defer action to fix it.
Many car companies already have patents on prototypes for very efficient cars.
A conversion to clean cars means that petroleum can be saved for the future.
In addition, the environmental sectors of many governments are setting strict rules for industries that pollute too much.
If companies do not abide by the standards, they are penalized with higher taxes.
Many countries are now subscribing to the point of view that immediate action is needed.
Experts will continue to come up with ideas for the future, and a synthesis of these ideas will help to support the growing population.
Because of overpopulation, too many people are crammed into cities and towns.
The environmental sectors of many governments are deferring strict standards.
A conversion to clean cars means petroleum can be used right now for people.
Companies that don’t abide by standards are penalized or their operations might be suspended.
What will a synthesis of good ideas for the future do?
What prototypes do companies have patents for in the passage?
An acrobat is a person who entertains people by doing amazing physical things.
There were acrobats at the circus that did impressive and complicated jumps.
Dennis was very industrious, so he never had problems finding a job.
If something is judicial, it is related to judges or courts of law.
The laws changed the way the judicial system was structured.
Although John’s parents both spoke Mandarin, he could only speak English.
To rehearse means to practice and prepare for a performance in front of people.
To scorn someone means to behave without respect toward them.
A villain is an evil person who breaks the law or hurts others.
The villain escaped with half o f my family’s valuables.
A vine is a plant that has long, twisting stems and climbs upward.
The branches o f the trees were covered with vines.
I E x e r c i s e  t.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
It interprets laws and 6______________ and judges whether they are fair.
Items like sunscreen, towel and bathing suit are staple items needed for the beach.
The hotel had a communal kitchen that the guests were free to use.
The acrobat had studied biology for many years before he became successful.
Mandarin Chinese is said to be one of the hardest languages to learn.
The statute was placed in front of the new police station.
The singers harmonized during the last part of the song.
After his shoelaces tore, the inventive boy used floss to tie his shoes together.
I’m interested in getting a job as a judicial officer, like my father the judge.
Some insects mimic the appearance of poisonous bugs to keep predators away.
The veteran gave my pet dog medicine to feel better.
Long vines grew around the side of the house and covered up the front wall.
The villain helped the family escape their house when it caught fire.
Hundred Plays Over two thousand years ago, Chinese farmers had a problem.
So what did they do? Since they had so much free time during the long, cold winters, the inventive farmers started performing tricks to entertain themselves.
They used their farm tools and anything they could find to make their tricks more spectacular.
They even twisted their bodies into crazy shapes and performed awesome jumps.
Overtime, they became great acrobats, and their art form came to be known as “ Hundred Plays.”
For example, in Mandarin-speaking parts of China, performers do the lion dance.
Early performers also did tricks on ropes and vines that were high above the ground.
Even though the acrobats’ fluid movements may have looked easy, they took a lot of work.
A veteran of the acrobatic arts usually teaches younger people in the village.
The teachings help them harmonize the sensory aspects of acrobatics with mental aspects.
In other words, it teaches them to use their physical and mental strength together.
Since the art has its origins with poor farmers, rich people used to scorn acrobats.
The rich people thought the acrobats just wanted to trick them.
They were invited to perform in metropolitan areas as well as in small villages.
Arts advocacy groups convinced the government to support Chinese acrobatics.
As a result, there is now a statute that made several villages the center of training future acrobats.
The Chinese farmers became great acrobats while planting staple crops like rice.
The version of the lion dance in Mandarin-speaking areas involves performers mimicking the movements of the lion.
The art form of Hundred Plays harmonizes the sensory and mental aspects of acrobatics.
Advocacy groups worked to get a statute that would protect acrobats from being scorned.
According to the passage, what were the early Chinese farmers like?
What were the misguided judgments about acrobats in the past?
What unusual object was used by early acrobats to do tricks high above the ground?
How did the location and audience of a Hundred Play change after acrobats gained respect?
Jim cannot join us because he is constrained by previous plans.
To emulate people means to imitate them because they are greatly admired.
As a small boy, he always tried to emulate his big brother.
The forefinger is the finger between one’s thumb and middle finger.
He shouted, “ There it is !” and pointed with his forefinger.
When something is inherent, it is a natural part of something else.
To restrain someone or something means to use physical strength to stop them.
To sprint means to run very fast over a short distance.
The kids didn’t want to be late to class, so they sprinted to the bus stop.
A stunt is something that is done in order to get attention or publicity.
The man jumped over the cars as a promotional stunt.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
I’m glad our teacher is so accepting of others as they are.
Chewing gum creates a lot of watery liquid used for d igestion and chewing food.
She had to use physical strength to stop the big dog so that it did not try to attack us.
Let’s see who can run fast over a short distance to the car in the shortest amount of time.
The ache is coming deep from within her organs within the body.
Please take a slightly wet towel and wipe the surface of the table to clean it.
She wore a ring on her finger between her thumb and middle finger.
A lack of money might lim it the development of the project.
His answer is always an informal wav of saving no.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
After walking through the desert, the thirsty man had no saliva left in his mouth.
We’ve been waiting at the depot for two hours for the train to arrive!
The joke was so funny that it made him yawn.
The tolerant coach didn’t think that girls were good enough to play on the team.
He spit on the ground to show his disgust for the situation.
I hope I don’t have to constrain another essay at school tomorrow.
The boy’s dream was to restrain as well as his father someday.
The evil man expected a large ransom before he would return the child to her mother.
The rotten meal gave me a terrible pain in my guts.
I intimidated my homework, so I could go outside and play baseball.
No one was impressed with Bobby’s stunt to get attention.
Using his forefinger, he pointed to a plane in the sky.
Take plenty of water with you before you begin the journey across the moist desert.
The janitor had to fix the heater before people could enter the building.
The Kidnapping Anne was a very quiet girl who had an inherent fear of almost everything.
They would hide behind the door of the school janitor’s closet, then jump out to scare her.
Once, a boy dressed up like a vampire and chased her down the street.
Anne hated being constrained by her fears, but she didn’t know how to be brave.
She was walking home from school one day when someone came up behind her.
Before she could turn around, a powerful man grabbed her.
She couldn’t scream because a huge hand was put over her mouth.
Anne knew that this could not be another stunt by her classmates.
The scary man restrained her arms and legs and carried her to his house.
Her guts began to hurt because she was so scared.
As he slept, she carefully wiggled her arms and legs until the ropes became loose.
She slipped out of the ropes and carefully opened the door.
She sprinted to the bus depot and boarded a bus to the police station.
She told the police what happened, and they arrested the.
She said, “Nope, I knew that I had to be brave and get out of there!”
The kids were very tolerant of Anne from then on.
They even decided that they would emulate her bravery if they.
The vampire restrained her arms and legs and carried herto his house.
Anne’s guts began to hurt because she was intimidated by her classmates.
At the end, the kids were tolerant of Anne and decided to emulate her bravery.
After the man prodded Anne with his forefinger, what did he say about the ransom?
What did Anne do after she sprinted to the bus depot?
To what question did Anne respond by saying “ nope” ?
A person’s ancestry is the series of people from whom a person descended.
M/e studied our ancestry and found out that we are related to royalty.
An archer is a person who uses a bow and arrows.
A conspiracy is a secret plan made by a group of people to do something illegal.
Some people think that there was a conspiracy to kill American president John KenneA.
While the sheriff was ill, the deputy took over his duties.
A funnel is an object with a wide top and a narrow bottom for pouring liquids.
The worker used a funnel when he poured the oil into the engine.
If something is hereditary, it is a trait passed onto children from their parents.
A hymn is a religious song that often praises a god.
The book was filled with hymns that the worshippers sang.
Prey is the animals that are hunted and eaten by another creature.
The lion ran as fast as he could to catch his prey.
Vinegar is a strong liquid made from sour wine that is used in cooking.
Be careful because too much vinegar will ruin the recipe.
Which of the following would most likely require the use of a funnel? a.
Which of the following describes a kind of deputy? a.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
She can play many instruments and sing many 3___________ Her mother is a good musician, too.
We marched to honor the king and the noble 8____________
She punished him if his room did not smell very 10_________
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
He liked to pour the strong tasting liquid made from sour wine directly on his salad.
To better explain the procedure, he used a great wav to show that things are similar.
We were in awe of the performance of the skilled person who uses a bow and arrows.
The war was a means to overthrow the cruel and unfair government.
I have a feeling that the robbery was a secret plan to do something illegal by the owners.
At the library, we learned how to trace our line of people from which we descended.
The people were convinced that the strange visitor was a person chosen by God.
The father acted like a person who treated people in a cruel and unfair way.
The British nobleman was a very kind and respected man.
The new mayor’s first priority was to select a second most important person.
The sarcastic teacher was always sure to speak clearly and honestly with his students.
The mechanic used a funnel to pour the gas into the tank.
I think the addition of more sodium to the recipe made the bread too salty.
Michael was once an expert archer and a great fighter.
In fact, his skills seemed to be hereditary; all the people in his ancestry were famous warriors.
However, he was getting old and no longer wished to fight.
One day, he was in the forest hunting prey when he saw a beautiful prophet singing a hymn.
You’re the only one who can defeat them and stop the tyranny.
Michael replied, “ But I’m too old to fight! I’m not confident that I can do it.”
Next, she added some seasoning and sodium and shook it up.
Michael rode his horse to a hilltop, where he could see the village of Hampton below.
He saw the evil tyrant and his men marching in a procession through the town.
An enemy deputy officer shouted, “ He looks as strong as an ox!” It was an apt analogy.
Michael grabbed the officer and threw him across the street with one arm.
The rest of the officers screamed and rode away, and their army followed.
The Earl of Hampton was an expert archer who was in the forest hunting prey.
The prophet used a funnel to put vinegar, garlic, some seasoning, and sodium in a bottle.
The evil tyrant and his men marched in a procession through the town.
The prophet, who sang a hymn, was involved in a conspiracy to take over Hampton.
What analogy did an enemy deputy officer use to describe Michael?
What did Michael say in a sarcastic tone before he inverted the bottle?
What did Michael say after the prophet said the village needed him to stop the tyranny?
What did Michael realize after his final encounter with the prophet?
To allege something is to say that it is true without offering proof.
The little g irl had alleged that her older brother hid her favorite doll.
The parents assembled to discuss ways to improve their children’s education.
If something is foul, then it is not pleasant or enjoyable.
He wouldn’t let his dog drink from the water because it had a foul smell.
To heighten an emotion means to increase the intensity of it.
The pleasant music heightened their enjoyment o f the wonderful dinner.
The mansion had thirty bedrooms, two kitchens, and a pool.
To outnumber a group means to have a greater number than it.
The girls outnumbered the boys at the school by four to one.
He was overjoyed by the news o f his promotion.
A terrace is an open area that is connected to a house or an apartment.
In the afternoons, she liked to sit on the terrace and check her email.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Once the weather was renovated, the day was warm and sunny.
Now, we were all able to go on a picnic in the park.
They were inventing a new plastic that would not melt under the extreme heat of the sun.
Why don’t you connect those two large blue arches, so that you can form a giant square?
The worse casualty from the earthquake was a woman who broke a leg.
They had hoped that it would reduce any future arguments.
Whenever Doug was in a foul mood, everyone enjoyed being around him.
This is the kitchen, and the adjoining room is the dining room.
You can stay in the house tonight, but your dog has to sleep outside in the mansion.
As a result, he was out of breath and sweaty by the time he got there.
She couldn’t stop smiling when she saw their lovely faces.
He had added another story to his home with large windows that overlooked the farmers’ pastures on the eastern border of his land.
He built an arch for the gate out of huge slabs of stone.
The lord was overjoyed with the addition to his home.
However, one day while he was sitting on the terrace, some farmers knocked at his door.
Despite his hospitality, the farmers appeared to be in a foul mood.
One farmer replied, “ That is actually the reason for our visit.” He then handed the lord a.
It alleged that the shadow cast by the mansion was harming their pastures.
They left, but they assembled that night outside the mansion’s gate.
The lord’s servants tried to defend the house, but the farmers outnumbered them.
The servants fled, and the farmers rushed into the mansion and set it on fire.
Everyone got out of the house, and there were no casualties.
However, the fire soon spread from the house to the adjoining pastures that belonged to the farmers.
The lord and the farmers were sorry for their actions.
The lord promised to pay for the burned pastures, and the farmers promised to rebuild the mansion.
They had learned that when you fight, both sides lose.
Rea d i n g  C o m p r e h e n s i o n.
Despite the lord’s hospitality, the farmers appeared to be overjoyed.
The lord built an arch for the gate out of slabs of stone.
When the lord said it was too late to revise his plans, it heightened the farmers’ foul mood.
While renovating, what did the lord erect around his mansion?
Why were there no casualties in the fire at the mansion?
While he was sitting on the terrace, who knocked on the mansion door?
If something is analogous to another thing, then it is like it in certain ways.
The relationship with his teacher was analogous to that o f a son and mother.
Binoculars are a device used for seeing things that are far away.
He could see the ship on the horizon only i f  he used his binoculars.
If something comprises something else, it consists of or is made up of it.
The outback is the wild inland region of Australia where very few people live.
A shortcut is a route that is shorter than the main route.
We got to the house first because we took a shortcut through the forest.
If a statement is vice versa, then its two main ideas are switched with one another.
The whereabouts of someone or something is the place where they are.
The police looked for the lost dog, but its whereabouts were still unknown.
If you have dual responsibilities, then you have things to take care of.
Which of the following is about the same as a tariff? a.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
But there might be a 4______________ wherever there is enough water.
She didn’t have much time to get to the house to 5______________ her promise.
Therefore, she took a(n) 6______________ that would get her there in no time.
The need to create more jobs 7______________the need to spend more money.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
These mines produce several types of valuable raw forms of rock.
The company had to pay a tax on exports for the steel it shipped to Europe.
She used the device used for seeing things far away to observe the small bird.
The painting portrayed what the beach looked like twenty years ago.
He had sent a letter from the city three days earlier.
The meal was made up mostly of beans and vegetables.
His promotion was a real event opposite to common knowledge due to his sparse knowledge.
It was difficult to lift the great mass that had accumulated in his backpack.
The Shortcut A truck driver was driving cargo from the outback to the coast.
He needed a huge truck to carry its bulk to a ship waiting at a pier on the country’s eastern coast.
At the border between two counties, he’d have to pay a tariff on the cargo.
However, he could keep his money if he avoided the station at the border.
He worried about getting in trouble for not paying the tariff, but the thought of extra money outweighed this concern.
To his surprise, it depicted a small road that had a dual advantage.
It not only avoided the border station but also was a shorter route to the coast.
It was analogous to an elephant trying to stand on a tree branch.
The bridge started to break as the truck crossed, and the trailer tilted to the right.
Fortunately, the truck made it safely across, but most of the ore fell into the river below.
The truck’s engine became too hot, so the driver parked it in the shade of a grove of trees until it cooled down.
He scanned his surroundings and eventually discovered a landmark that led him back to the proper route.
Finally, he arrived at the pier, but the ship wasn’t there.
When he asked about the ship’s whereabouts, a man said that it had left thirty minutes ago.
The shortest route can be the longest, and vice versa, a long.
The driver’s load was comprised of many types of ore.
The paradox of the shortcut was that the shortest route could be the longest but not vice versa.
When the trailer tilted, the driver’s binoculars fell into the river.
What outweighed the driver’s concern of being punished for not paying the tariff?
What was the dual advantage of the route depicted on the map?
What made the driver park his truck in a grove of trees while in the outback?
Why couldn’t the driver determine the ship’s whereabouts at the pier?
A delta is flat area where a river splits into smaller rivers that flow into the sea.
The archeologists found many ancient materials in the delta o f the Nile River.
To expire is to no longer be effective because its use has come to an end.
The man’s driver’s license was going to expire in two days.
To haunt is to cause problems or negative thoughts over a long period of time.
His thoughts about his scary dream haunted him for weeks.
Moss is a small green or yellow plant that grows on wet dirt, rocks, or tree trunks.
Be careful not to slip on the moss that’s covering those rocks.
When a bird pecks, it bites or hits something with its beak.
A reservoir is a place for storing water for a town to use.
If  it doesn’t rain soon, the reservoir is going to dry up completely.
Which of the following might a liberal person do? a.
Which of these animals have a long streak on their bodies? a.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
After seeing her house on fire, jenna was troubled by thoughts of fire.
The boy had small round rocks stuck on the bottom of his shoe.
The bird bit or hit the dish and carried away pieces of bread.
The city made a place to store water, so there would always be water for the people.
She poured soap to clean dishes into the sink and washed the dishes.
The woman was impressed by her friend’s polite and respectful brother.
The scientist went to school for many years to earn her proof of ability.
I added some more rocks that served as fuel to the fire.
Clara didn’t want to offend her grandmother, so she used a replacement for an unpleasant word to refer to old age.
The land in the flat place where the river divides was good for growing food.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
They had three minutes to find their way out of the 1______________
The tiles had lovely designs on them and also pieces of A______________
Gene squeezed the bottle and got a 5______________ of ketchup on his shirt.
The 6______________ host was nice enough to get him a new shirt.
They had been washed up from the bottom of the 8_____________
On the other side of the water, there was a cottage.
He looked at the moss on the trees and watched a bird peck at the ground.
He had a streak of blood on his shirt and some pebbles stuck in his skin.
When they arrived at the cottage, he realized the man was the mad.
It smelled like charcoal, but it looked like a normal house.
While Lucas cleaned his cut, the man washed the blood out of his shirt with detergent.
He pointed to his credentials which hung on the wall.
It was getting dark, so he asked, “ Could you take me home now?”
Lucas was surprised that people thought the man was crazy.
Next time, Lucas wouldn’t make judgments about people without getting to know them first.
Lucas’s thoughts about the house across the reservoir haunted him.
Lucas collected crickets and moss while he walked through the forest.
Lucas got a streak of blood on his shirt and pebbles in his skin from falling down.
Where was the cottage located in relation to the grandfather’s house?
Why did the man point to his credentials on the wall?
What did the man say about the term “ mad hatter” ?
What did the courteous man teach Lucas at the end of the story?
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
The 600 words in each book of this series along with the additional target words presented in the appendices included in the first three books of the series are the most useful words in English.
They were found by analysis of a collection of English course books from various levels in the primary, secondary and tertiary school systems.
The words included in this series were chosen because they occurred many times in different levels of these materials.
Because of the way that they were chosen, these words have the following characteristics:
No matter what English course you are studying, the words in these books will be of value to you.
This means that the effort in learning the words is well repaid by the number of times learners have a chance to encounter or use them.
These books as a whole cover a large proportion of the words in any spoken or written text.
They also cover at least 90% of the words in conversation.
The activities in these books are specially designed to make use of important learning conditions.
Firstly, the words are introduced using sentence definitions and an example sentence.
The activities that follow in the units encourage learners to recall the meanings and forms of the words.
Some activities also make the learners think about the meaning of the words in the context of a sentence— a sentence different from the sentences that occurred in the introduction of the words.
Moreover, each unit ends with a story containing the target words.
While reading the story, the learners have to recall the meanings of the words and suit them to the context of the story.
Such activities help learners develop a better understanding of a common meaning for a given word which fits the different uses.
Illustrations for each target word are provided to help learners visualize the word as it is being used in the example sentence.
It should be noted that words have more than one grammatical category.
However, this series focuses on the word’s most common form.
This is mentioned to remind learners that just because a word is labeled and utilized as a noun in this series does not mean that it can never be used in another form such as an adjective.
A well-balanced language course provides four major opportunities for learning: learning through input, learning through output, deliberate learning, and fluency development.
The highly structured activities in these books support all four types of learning opportunities.
In addition, learning can further be supported through the following activities:
Have students create vocabulary cards with one word from the unit on one side of the card and the translation of the word in the student’s first language on the other side.
Students should use the cards for study in free moments during the day.
Over several weeks, students will find that quick repeated studying for brief periods of time is more effective than studying for hours at one sitting.
Reading such books provides both enjoyment as well as meaning-focused input which will help the words stick in students’ memory.
Practice reading fluency to promote faster recall of word meaning for both sight recognition and usage.
Compass Publishing’s Reading for Speed and Fluency is a good resource for reading fluency material.
Reinforcement of the high-frequency vocabulary presented in this series is important across all the four.
His specialist interests are language teaching methodology and vocabulary learning.
Convenience is a state of being able to do something with little effort.
The Internet allows consumers to shop at their own convenience.
To elapse means to pass, as in seconds, minutes, or hours.
A few seconds must elapse before you can take another picture.
To opt is to make a choice, especially when deciding in favor of something.
My brother likes chocolate ice cream, but I always opt for vanilla.
When someone is resourceful, they are good at dealing with hard situations.
After his boat sunk, Matt was resourceful enough to build a raft.
How would you feel if there was a dearth of food? a.
How would a resourceful person deal with a problem? a.
How would you describe someone feeling a sense of outrage? b.
What would a tired person likely opt to do? a.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Dan was a nice man, but no one would work for him because of his fanciful ideas.
Because there was a dearth of food at home, the family went out to eat.
He displayed them in a cache for everyone to see.
Because he had planned for the trap to capture his victim, he was very deliberate.
The Little Mice Beth was a very resourceful and conservative mouse.
So she decided to make gathering food for winter her primary job.
Gathering food was a grueling and mundane activity, but Beth made a deliberate effort because she knew that it was important.
She allotted herself a few hours every day to collect beans.
By winter, she had collected a massive pile and hid them in a cache.
She had fanciful ideas about how she would survive winter.
She thought that food would just come to her and that she could work at her own convenience.
She opted to spend the days playing and dancing, instead of gathering beans.
When the final hours of autumn elapsed, Mary had only a paltry amount of food stored away.
Mary realized that her food supply was too small to last through winter.
But I will not give you any of my beans.
You can still work hard and gather enough food for the winter.
Mary cried with outrage, “There is too much work! I won’t have any time to dance or play!”
Mary griped some more, but she knew that her sister was right.
She took the bag and went to work gathering her own beans for the winter.
Beth was resourceful and conservative, so she gathered a paltry pile of beans for her cache.
Because gathering food was tedious, Beth allotted a few hours of every day to do it.
Beth did grueling and mundane work to overcome the dearth of food in the winter.
Beth’s reply appalled Mary and made her reply in outrage.
When the hours of autumn elapsed, Mary had a massive amount of food.
What did Mary want her sister to have empathy about?
How did Mary rectify her dire situation and get sustenance?
Even though she griped, what did Mary know at the end of the story?
If a place is arid, then it is hot and dry and gets very little or no rain.
If someone is eligible, then they are permitted to do or have something.
Only people who bought tickets were eligible to win a prize.
Moisture is small drops of water in the air or on a surface.
If you breathe on a window, moisture from your breath collects on the glass.
What would probably happen if you deprived someone of food? a.
If you were speculating about something, you would be doing what? a.
If something were covered with moisture, then it would feel.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
Traveling across the 1_____________ was more difficult than it seemed.
The ground was very 2_____________, and the grass was high.
He forgot that in a humid place everything was covered with 4_____________
The people who attend that church 5______________for two weeks in March.
We had gotten used to making small fires when it was so 8_____________
Those that didn’t promise to be on their best behavior were not 10_
Climbing up the prairie was more difficult without the help of ropes.
There was no way he could mend the holes in his shirt.
In some countries, only people who owned land were eligible to vote.
He knew she didn’t like him, but he helped her nonetheless.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
That part of the country is so hot and dry that no one lives there.
After getting off the boat, they took a train toward the center of the country.
They survived through the time in which no rain fell by carrying water down from the hills.
This house for the monks was built well over 200 years ago.
He knew he’d get in trouble, but he stole the money despite the punishment.
He guessed that the visitor’s team would win the game.
The number of people helping to clean the trash near the river was more than enough.
There was a small park that was next to the yard surrounding the church.
The long lines did not allow her of a chance to buy a ticket for the concert.
It had not rained on the prairie for several months.
Because of the drought, the climate had become very arid.
The hungry families heard about an abbey near the mountains where food and water was still abundant.
So they traveled inland, across the prairie, to the abbey.
At first only a few families arrived, seeking food and shelter.
The monks fed them and let them sleep in the small cathedral.
These people had to travel farther, so they were in worse condition.
They began to speculate that there would be no food.
It would be wrong to deprive them of food and shelter.
We took an oath to help those that need help.
That might be true, but we must help them nonetheless.
The monks were reluctant at first, but they did what the oldest monk said.
By the end of winter, there was still enough food and shelter for everyone.
They learned that sometimes helping others means you must give more help than you first expected.
The moisture in the soil was gone because a drought made the prairie become arid.
The hungry families traveled inland to an abbey that still had abundant food.
Food was scarce, but the monks had to deprive the families nonetheless.
At first there was ample food and enough room in the cathedral for everyone.
The rugged journey to the abbey had left many people’s clothing looking ragged.
According to the abbot, who was eligible to receive the monks’ help?
When the monks grumbled, what did the young monk speculate would happen if more families arrived?
Why did the monks fast and sleep in the churchyard that adjoined the cathedral?
To assert a fact or belief means to state it with confidence.
He asserted that his mother’s cooking was better than his best friend’s.
Only the keenest of students could have solved that math problem.
Relativity is a set of ideas about time and space developed by Albert Einstein.
Relativity teaches that light travels at the same speed in the universe.
If something is theoretical, it is based on theory rather than experience.
His conclusion was only theoretical and not meant to be publicized.
Which of the following would NOT be considered celestial? a.
What else does sociology deal with besides people and their culture? a.
If you excel at something, then that means you are______
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
In physiology, we studied various types of rock and the process that made them.
She feared that if no one married her, she’d be a bachelor her entire life.
Many old factories harnessed rivers and streams to power their equipment.
Her knowledge of different societies came from her work in sociology.
If the two bikes hadn’t turned at the last moment, there would have been a collision.
In geology, we learned about the importance of our bones.
The car excelled every time he stepped on the gas pedal.
Learning about calculus in my literature class was a really enjoyable time.
The test proved that Mark was keener than his older brother Dave.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
She really learned a lot from just one class of the beliefs and stories of different cultures.
When he states the fact with confidence that flowers can grow here, you believe him.
The tests will prove whether or not his discovery is real and not just based on theory.
The dangerous thing about nuclear power is the radiation waste it produces.
John has good learning skills that have helped him in his studies.
The stars and moon in outer space objects lit the path so I could see where I was walking.
Having a certificate of completed studies will give him more options for the future.
Albert Einstein’s ideas about time and space changed both science and the world.
You have to be very intelligent in orderto solve this puzzle in a short amount of time.
Every day the unmarried men came to her home to see which of them she might choose.
The Bachelor’s Lesson A keen young bachelor had finished his studies at the university.
I even understand the great theoretical teachings of science, such as relativity.
But actually, there was something the bachelor did not know.
Though his analytic abilities were great, he failed to notice he was missing something very important in his life.
One day while walking through town, the bachelor witnessed a collision between two cars.
Both drivers appeared to be injured, but the scholar only stood and watched.
Suddenly the bachelor realized he was the only person near the accident.
He carefully helped them out of their vehicles and then called an ambulance.
The drivers were saved, and the bachelor felt the best he had in his entire life.
Studying mythology, sociology, and geology didn’t give him this wonderful feeling.
It was the act of helping others, not his cognitive skills, that gave him this great feeling.
He learned that intellect isn’t everything; being helpful is just as important.
The bachelor excelled at calculus, physiology, and theoretical science, such as relativity.
He knew the movements of radioactive materials and how to harness the power of celestial objects.
The bachelor thought the drivers in the collision were not competent.
Studying mythology, sociology, and geology gave the bachelor a wonderful feeling.
The bachelor’s intellect and not his cognitive talents had made him feel this great.
What did the keen bachelor assert after receiving his diploma?
Despite his analytic abilities, what did the bachelor fail to notice about his life?
Besides a brain, what did the bachelor realize was important to have in life?
People in the city are usually more affluent than people in the country.
To bribe someone means to illegally persuade them for a favor with money.
The judge was bribed so that she would set the suspect free.
A headquarters is a building where the bosses of a company work.
He drove the long route to headquarters because it was a nice day.
An infrastructure is a collection of services needed to run a society or business.
Senators have to legislate fairly, so most people will enjoy the benefits.
If something is legitimate, then it is acceptable according to the law.
She found a legitimate plan to raise extra funds for her vacation.
The store added more merchandise because there were more shoppers.
A subsidy is money given by the government to companies to assist them.
The official gave the company a subsidy, so it could open two new factories.
A transaction is an act of buying or selling something.
Because the clerk was new at the job, the simple transaction took a long time.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
He added his trash to the large pile of rubbish.
The subsidy helped the company recover some of the money it had lost.
The store sold most of its merchandise in the sale over the weekend.
Bigger kids sometimes find it easy to manipulate smaller children.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Getting to play with her friends was something to make her want to clean her room.
The act of selling something took place right before the shop closed.
By the end of the meeting, they had made into law the repair of the highways.
She illegally persuaded the guard, so he would let her into the secret meeting.
It was a good year for the banks, but it was a bad year for places that sell things to the public.
The person who controls the company is a very efficient manager.
The papers that she needed were at the building where the bosses worked.
The law-breaking company was stealing money from many of its investors.
Shawn is working for a law-following organization in a bad part of town.
The money made by our company was even better than last year’s.
Pig was an administrator at a big factory that made different kinds of merchandise.
During a meeting at the company’s headquarters, his bosses said they wanted the factory to make more money.
Pig had always wanted to be as affluent as his bosses.
However, most were not very nice, and some were not legitimate.
Next, he bribed some corrupt senators into legislating special subsidies for the factory.
Finally, instead of paying a company to dispose of the factory’s rubbish properly, he violated the law by throwing it into the river to save money.
At first, all the changes to the factory’s infrastructure created more revenue.
But soon many stores could no longer sell the factory’s goods at retail.
It seemed that the machines couldn’t make products as well as the workers.
The animals had told their friends and family to stop buying the factory’s goods.
Officials discovered the factory’s rubbish in the river, and when they audited the company, they discovered that Pig had manipulated the law in order to get more money.
He had tried to become rich by saving money any way possible, but the cheapest way was not always the best.
Rabbit was an administrator at a big factory that made different kinds of merchandise.
Some of the changes made to the factory were legitimate.
Pig bribed some corrupt senators into legislating special subsidies for his factory.
Pig violated the law by disposing of the factory’s rubbish in the ocean.
At first, changes to the factory’s infrastructure created less revenue.
What happened to the other animals after Pig automated his factory?
According to the officials who audited Pig’s factory, why did he manipulate the law?
Why could the stores no longer sell goods at retail?
To assess something means to judge the structure, purpose, or quality of it.
She assessed the condition of the toy car before buying it.
His speech commenced with a “thankyou” to all who had helped him succeed.
If something is synthetic, then it is made to be like something natural.
Clothing made out of synthetic fabrics is very effective at keeping people warm.
If something is terminal, then it causes or results in death.
Since his condition was not terminal, he felt a great sense of relief.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
One reason was that anything could happen while the fire was 6_____________
The 7______________of the mayor’s speech was about building the new library.
The building would be a(n) 8_____________ addition to the scenery downtown.
His amazing skills during the last half of the game 9_____________ the crowd.
I 9 Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Because she took the test with such speed, she made several silly mistakes.
Her anniversary had a quality that made it important because it was also her birthday.
Though the smallest basic units in ice and steam are similar, their shapes are different.
The closeness in space of her office is only a short distance from mine.
He could sleep late that day or get up early and start his work.
The noises on the computer sounded like they were made to sound like real ones.
Please judge the quality of his proposal before we decide to meet with him.
The best cure for a slightly injured foot is putting ice on it.
Most of the advertisements on TV are related to the development of drugs commercials.
In his haste to go on vacation, Alexander Fleming had left his laboratory in a mess.
The essence of his ongoing work involved a type of bacteria.
An infection caused by the bacteria was often terminal, and he was looking for a remedy.
He had left the bacteria out while he was away.
When he returned from vacation, he found that his lab was covered in fungus.
While he was cleaning, he had an impulse to examine the fungus.
He saw that whenever the fungus was in close proximity to the bacteria, the bacteria died.
Though he was a messy scientist, his experiments were precise.
He thought that there might be some significance to the fungus.
He immediately commenced an experiment to assess what had happened to the bacteria.
It had either died by accident or the fungus had killed it.
All this time, he had been looking for a synthetic material to kill the bacteria.
He knew that something in the fungus had killed the bacteria.
His next step was to find those molecules that had done it.
When he found them, he extracted them and put them into a pill.
Soon after, the new drug was being used all over the world.
One of the most fabulous pharmaceutical discoveries was an accident.
The essence of the scientist’s ongoing work was to find a remedy for a terminal infection.
The infection caused by the bacteria he was working on was not terminal.
Whenever the synthetic material was far from the bacteria, the bacteria died.
In his haste to go on vacation, how had Alexander Fleming left his laboratory?
When did the scientist get an impulse to examine the fungus?
He noticed that most of the cities in Australia are on the coastline.
To deter means to prevent or discourage someone from doing something.
To devise something means to have an idea or plan about it in the mind.
To impair something means to damage it or make it worse.
If something is indigenous, it is originally from, or native to, a place.
A migraine is a painful headache that makes one feel sick.
My sister gets a migraine every time she has a lot of stress.
Optimism is the feeling of being hopeful about the future or success of something.
What would be peculiar to find in the ocean? a.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Going away to college is scary, but I have optimism that I’ll have a good time.
My head hurts so badly that I can’t think straight.
He likes to wear his shoes on the wrong feet.
The tree is getting too big for our yard! Ask Jim to cut off some of the limbs.
I fell off my bike, but I didn’t break any bones.
From the mountain ridge, you can see the entire city below.
We were in awe of the professor’s expertise on the subject.
You should thrustthe baby when putting him in bed, so he doesn’t wake up.
I will get married to my spouse one year from today.
She is on a quest to find her long lost brother.
If you don’t like your job, you should devise it.
She will have to get more altitude if she wants to swim faster.
The workers implemented a new strategy to be more efficient.
Nothing will deter me in my hunt for the perfect flower.
The Island “Where am I?” Bob thought to himself when he woke up on a peculiar beach.
He washed ashore on a small island, but he had gotten hurt during the storm.
He had a terrible migraine, and he had a fracture in his shoulder.
But he had a strong desire to make it home to his spouse and children.
He had to tolerate all the pain and devise a plan.
He could build a raft! He cut down some leaves and tree limbs.
Even though his shoulder injury impaired his ability to carry the materials, he slowly dragged them down the mountain until he reached the coastline.
He used his building expertise to line up the limbs and tie them together with long vines.
When the raft was finished, Bob was happy with his work.
At last, Bob was ready to implement his escape plan.
With all his might, he thrust the raft into the water.
He climbed on and began the quest to find his way home.
In a few days, he made it to shore and ran home to see his happy family.
Bob had a migraine and a shoulder fracture when he awoke on the peculiar beach.
Bob implemented a plan to bring his spouse and children to the island.
The indigenous tree limbs impaired Bob’s ability to carry the materials.
Bob was proficient in building, and he used his expertise to build the raft.
Bob thrust the raft into the water to begin his quest.
What type of insight did Bob hope to gain when he moved to a higher altitude?
Why did Bob need to tolerate the pain and devise a plan?
What did Bob drag from the ridge to the coastline?
The biosphere is the earth’s surface and atmosphere where there are living things.
My bizarre dreams make no sense to me when I am awake.
A companion is a person that someone spends a lot of time with.
To digest means to swallow food and pass it through the body.
Allow some time for food to be digested before going swimming.
Ecology is the study of the environment and living things.
We study ecology to learn how to help improve the Earth.
If something is infinite, it has no limit or end.
The nucleus is the central part of an atom or cell.
When a place is temperate, it never gets too hot or cold.
In Peru, the weather is temperate and rarely gets too hot or cold.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Dogs do not have the ability to bear the pain to high pitched noises.
The boring and repeating sounds from a ticking clock can make some people annoyed.
I used my microscope to see the cell’s central part.
The rough fur of the gorilla is a defining trait.
The reproductive process in rabbits explains how they hunt for food.
In Biology class, we learned about the different parts of a cell’s nucleus.
It is hard for some people to remain silent for the duration of a long movie.
I will have to undergo through the tunnel to get home.
It would be better if it was not so coarse.
She has exactly twenty jelly beans, which is an infinite amount.
The boy became a prominent figure in town after he saved the woman’s life.
There is no life on Venus, so researchers study its ecology instead.
The repetitive sound of ocean waves helps me to fall asleep.
The drawing of the earth showed the different elements of the biosphere.
Small World Even though people can’t see me, I’m an important part of Earth’s biosphere.
There is more of my kind than any other plant or animal in the world.
Without me, other plants and animals would not even exist, l ama protist, and my tiny body is made up of one single cell.
Unlike most aquatic plants and animals, I don’t need a temperate climate.
Right now, I’m swimming around in a bucket of boiling water! The temperature is 150 degrees Celsius, but I feel comfortable.
I have coarse hairs called cilia that help me swim around in here.
I move my cilia in a repetitive motion for the duration of my swim.
It takes me about five minutes to swim a distance of just one millimeter!
When I get hungry, I look for tiny, vulnerable parasites.
I have an organ that works just like a human stomach.
Instead, I undergo a process called fission, where my own nucleus splits in half.
An exact copy of my nucleus is made, which forms into another protist.
I can create an infinite number of new protists all by myself!
Things in an aquatic protist’s world can be absolutely bizarre.
Coarse cilia move in a repetitive motion for the duration of a protist’s swim.
An infinite number of new protists can be created by the impressive feat of fission.
What temperature, in degrees Celsius, could the protist be comfortable in?
What prominent thing does a protist release into the biosphere?
If something is ceramic, it is made of baked clay.
We were happy to move away from our hostile neighbor.
Your intake of food is the amount of food you take into your body.
The doctor said I needed to increase my intake of fruits and vegetables.
Medication is medicine or drugs given to people who are sick.
The old man travels the world in search of obscure books.
Which of the following is true of a ceramic bowl? a.
When you peel a piece of fruit, you _ a.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
There is a popular 3_____________ that cooking well is difficult.
Tomorrow, I will ask the doctor for a new 6_
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
In the past, many people suffered from malnutrition because of a lack of food.
Did you know that some flowers are edible? They both look and taste good.
The dog was hiding in a dense patch of grass.
You can have health problems if your sugar intake is too high.
After we lost the game, our coach showed his dignity.
I strive to exercise at least twenty minutes each day to stay in shape.
Becoming a Healer Years ago, I worked at a small health clinic in a remote country.
It attacked people’s lungs, causing them to need a respirator to breathe.
I was trying out a new medication to treat these people instead of using a respirator.
Everything was going fine until war broke out in a nearby country.
Many people from that country fled the hostile invading army.
The army wanted to dominate the people, but the people didn’t want to be oppressed.
So they walked hundreds of miles across barren land to get away.
Some of these people came to our clinic for treatment.
Her son suffered from malnutrition and stomach pain, and she didn’t know what to do.
Nonetheless, when I saw her sadness, I knew I had to help her son.
The woman had been feeding her son bread and water.
She had a misconception that it would be enough for him.
However, I knew that he needed to eat vegetables, too.
So I took her outside and showed her a dense patch of edible plants.
I taught her howto dig up the roots, peel them, and cook them for her son.
I explained that she should increase her son’s intake of these vegetables.
Likewise, she should strive to get him some meat once a week to help him regain his strength.
I sent her off with a prescription for some pain medicine, but she also left my office with some new culinary skills.
A few weeks later, she returned to tell me her son was healthy again.
The respirator helped people with the obscure syndrome, and the doctor hoped the medication would do likewise.
The hostile doctor wanted to dominate and oppress the people.
The doctor was not adept at treating malnutrition before meeting the mother and her son.
The doctor showed the woman a dense patch of barren land.
The woman gave the doctor a ceramic bowl to show off her pottery skills.
Instead of a respirator, what did the doctor use to treat the syndrome?
What misconception did the woman have about her son’s food intake?
Why did the doctor teach the woman to peel and cook the roots?
What kind of prescription did the doctor give to the woman?
Why did the doctor ask the woman to strive to get meat for her son?
If something is archaic, it is very old or outdated.
Brass is a metal that is used to make musical instruments and ornaments.
A fad is something that is popular for a short time.
The hula hoop was a fad for a few years, but it soon lost its popularity.
We visited a castle that was built during medieval times.
If something is obsolete, it is not used anymore because something better exists.
If a person has prestige, people admire or respect them.
The young actress gained much prestige after she won an award.
If something is radical, it is very new or different.
The president is planning to make some radical changes to the law.
To refute something means to prove that it is false or incorrect.
The bank manager has refuted the claims that he lied to his customers.
To weave means to make cloth using horizontal and vertical threads.
We saw a woman weave a blanket on our vacation to South America.
Which of these things is often made of brass? a.
Which of these is a component in a radio? a.
Which of these things could be seen during the medieval ages? a.
If you are on a small peninsula, you will be quite near to______ a.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Knights in armor and their squires were common sites in medieval times.
Our new boss hasn’t made any changes to the company.
I don’t want to impose on my father to help me with my homework.
He refuted me because I didn’t wash the plates after dinner.
In capitalism, people can own just about any product or object they want.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Our hotel was situated on a piece of land that was surrounded by the sea on three sides.
Doctors say the exercise can reduce the chances of getting ill.
Children’s reliance on their parents decreases as they get older.
There are a number of disadvantages to taking up this new technology.
A large amount of students from my school want to go to university.
I need to buy some new parts for my computer to make it work properly.
I’m sorry to interrupt and intrude on you, but I need some help with my car.
The newspaper editor disproved the claim that the stories in the paper were untrue.
The kind and generous women gave lots of money to help the poor.
It wove faster and straighter than anyone could weave by hand.
He decided to take it to two cities on a peninsula, Netherton and Wilton.
In these cities, a large proportion of the people worked in weaving.
Joseph first took his machine to the mayor of Netherton.
He knew about the people’s dependence on weaving for their livelihood.
If he bought the machine, the people would lose their jobs.
So Joseph took his machine to the mayor at Wilton.
This mayorthought Joseph’s machine was spectacular and spent a long time looking at its different components made of brass.
The mayor couldn’t refute the fact that the machine had drawbacks that would affect the people’s jobs.
But he realized the machine could bring money and prestige.
Within a year, Wilton was a wealthy city, famous for its wonderful cloth.
People no longer wove but worked in managerial jobs at cloth factories instead.
After that, both Netherton and Wilton became rich cities, famous throughout the land for their wonderful cloth.
Joseph thought the mayor of Netherton’s ideas were medieval and archaic.
The mayor of Wilton refuted the fact that the machine had drawbacks.
In Wilton, the people who used to weave got managerial positions at the factories.
What job did a large proportion of the people on the peninsula do?
What did the benevolent mayor of Netherton realize about the people’s dependence on weaving?
What did the mayor of Wilton realize about the spectacular machine with components made of brass?
Why did income diminish in Netherton after machines were introduced in Wilton?
Contempt is the feeling of having no respect for something.
To dedicate oneself to something means to put a lot of time and effort into it.
When someone is indifferent toward something, they have a lack of interest in it.
To irrigate means to supply water to land so that crops can grow.
In dry climates, it is important to irrigate fields of crops.
To maximize something is to make it as great in amount, size, or importance.
A precaution is an action that is meant to stop something bad from happening.
Asa precaution, you should put on a heavy coat before going out in cold weather.
To sow seeds means to plant them in the ground.
What kind of person would most people have contempt for? a.
Which of these things would you most likely want to maximize? a.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
I think the soy beans would taste better if we cooked them first.
Jim said he would finance their new store fora share of their profits.
We all knew the precaution of our actions would be terrible.
It can be difficult to keep track of monetary matters.
The capitalist believed that his efforts would lead to great profits in the future.
The company accountant found an error in the bank statement.
I need to dedicate my house before the winter season.
The rain saturated the ground so much that it was as dry as a stone.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The driver kept both hands on the wheel as a wav to prevent something bad.
People who keep financial accounts have many important duties in a business.
I wish 1 knew the money-related value of my gold collection.
The preparation duties before the concert included testing the microphones.
The spilled juice completely soaked the small rug on the kitchen floor.
That business person owns companies in many countries around the world.
She is lacking interest about what movie we choose to watch.
I want to decide to put the time and effort of myself to saving kittens.
I Life on the Farm Bill was an excellent capitalist.
He financed a large aviation enterprise that made a lot.
He knew how to maximize monetary gains in every business deal he made.
Bill knew that he had to do something about it, or he would be depressed for the rest of his life.
One day, Bill was in his office when he heard a knock at the door.
Bill could maximize monetary gains in the aviation enterprise that he financed.
Bill irrigated his crops as a precaution for the upcoming rain in summer.
Bill sowed seeds and saturated the soy and cabbage plants.
What did the accountant say when Bill said he would stop being a capitalist and become a farmer?
What was the result of Bill dedicating himself to his exquisite farm?
What simplicity was important for Bill to get rid of his stress?
When a bad thing is acute, it is very severe and intense.
When she fell out of the tree, the girl felt an acute pain in her arm.
A biography is an account of someone’s life that is written by someone else.
We read a biography about Charles Darwin in science class.
When something is gorgeous, it is very pleasing and attractive.
The girl picked out a gorgeous dress to wear to the dance.
A legacy is an effect that exists because of a person or thing in the past.
The legacy of the ancient Egyptians can be seen in their monuments.
To narrate a story means to write about it or read it aloud.
This story was written by John, but Aaron is narrating it to the crowd.
When something is notorious, it is well-known because of something bad.
A partiality is a tendency to prefer one thing to another.
She has a partiality for walking to school instead of driving.
My wife made a spontaneous decision to buy a new sofa while I was at work.
A virtue is a good quality or way of behaving.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
I would like to write a story about his life for my father someday.
My little brother has an awful, intense case of chicken pox.
The entire family decided to talk to Father about his constant violent behavior.
The preacher strongly believed that kindness was the most important good quality.
The action in the play was read aloud by the teacher.
The girl had a strong preference over another flavor for chocolate ice cream.
Black and white TVs are no longer used in modern time because people prefer color TVs.
The great actor left behind a great result of his actions that continues to exist.
She is known for bad things because she likes to hang around the wrong people.
I have no idea what would force Dan to act in such a mean way.
The good father was notorious for doing nice things for his family.
We planned our spontaneous vacation for weeks before we left for the trip.
It is polite to wait until the end of a play to clap for the performers.
This novel is a masterpiece by the best writer of the 20th century.
When the child got scared, he hid in the closet to show his dominance.
A funny movie always boosts my mood when I am feeling sad.
The sunset was so gorgeous that everyone turned away in disgust.
I moved to a different climate because of my partiality for warmer weather.
I will write my own biography when I turn 50 years old.
My need to pay rent compelled me to get a job and make enough money.
One coat of paint was not enough, so I put on multiple coats.
We knew a win was inevitable when our team was ahead by 100 points.
Beethoven’s Gift Beethoven was a great composer of classical music in the 1800s.
But do you know what really makes him special? Even though millions of people got to hear his multiple masterpieces, he never did.
Beethoven wrote his best pieces after he went completely deaf!
His partiality toward classical music developed when he was very young.
When he was five, he learned how to play the piano.
From then, nothing could stop his passion for writing and playing music.
When Beethoven was twenty, he began to lose his hearing.
It was inevitable that he would eventually lose it altogether.
It was very hard for him to keep writing music.
He lost the virtue of patience, and he became notorious for his aggression.
His passion for music compelled him to keep performing even after he went deaf.
He couldn’t hear himself play, but he knew that his creations sounded gorgeous.
He gave the musicians a cue, and they began to play.
He couldn’t hear the music, but he said that he could feel it.
In that beautiful moment, the applause boosted his emotions, and he began to cry.
He didn’t survive the sickness, but his music did because great music never becomes outdated.
Even though Beethoven is gone, his legacy will live on forever.
It was inevitable that Beethoven would lose his virtue altogether.
How old was Beethoven when he first learned to play the piano?
What did Beethoven do when he saw the crowd clap and cheer at the banquet?
What compelled him to keep performing after his acute, spontaneous hearing loss?
Competence is the ability to do something well or effectively.
The job was easy because the group had enough competence to do it well.
To confer with someone means to discuss something with them to make a decision.
I will have to confer with my wife before I can purchase a new car.
When things are consecutive, they happen one after another without interruption.
A cube is a solid object with six square surfaces that are all the same size.
Please get me some ice cubes to put in my soda.
A person’s posture is the position in which they stand or sit.
Your back will feel better if you improve your posture.
To supervise something means to make sure that it is done correctly.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
I feel the best when the hours I sleep are one after another without interruption.
Even though he was young, the boy’s facial features were qualities related to men.
My girlfriend and I are happy because we are successful at existing together.
The strong and fit fireman carried the children out of the burning building.
The college student handbook lists the classes I need to take to get my degree.
My mother was shocked when she found out I had a permanent drawing on my skin.
The first thing Al noticed about the new employee was his bad standing position.
This snowflake has perfect halves that are the exact same but mirror images.
The not exact or detailed measurements turned out to be good enough.
The undergraduate program at our school includes several possible degrees.
She conferred with her coworkers before presenting their work to the boss.
Our teacher was quick to give us feedback on our homework.
The wall was situated in the north part of the yard.
The symmetry of the flower arrangement made it look very attractive.
The angry father applauded his son when he got in trouble at school.
The masculine girl looked very pretty in her new dress.
In the final revision, he made sure his work was crude.
The muscular movie star always got the role of the superhero in the movie.
On our trip, we visited the monument built for George Washington.
His ignorance led him to the final round of the tournament.
She leaves the lights on at night because of her competence for the dark.
When the couple got divorced, it was clear that they were compatible.
Our basketball team won the championship for three consecutive years.
Brothers John and Mark were brothers, but they were quite different people.
Mark was a good artist, but he was not very intelligent.
He was small and weak, but he was very smart.
John was an undergraduate in college, and he studied anthropology and history.
The brothers loved each other very much, but they thought they had nothing in common.
One day, the mayor appointed Mark to build a monument: a statue of Egyptian Pharaoh, Tut.
Mark agreed to do the job, but he had a problem.
He had no idea who Pharaoh Tut was! However, he thought he had the competence to build a good statue anyway.
He made some crude measurements and sculpted a statue of a very old man with a tattoo on his chest.
Mark was proud of his work, but when John saw the statue, he laughed aloud.
At last, the finished statue was situated in front of the museum.
John replied, “I agree! When we combine our talents, we are capable of greatness.”
Mark’s masculine features included a mustache and a muscular body.
John appointed himself to supervise Mark’s work and give him feedback about posture and symmetry.
Mark made crude measurements and situated a tattoo on his original monument’s chest.
Why did everyone applaud the brothers after ten consecutive hours?
What did Mark think he had the competence to do?
What did John explain to Mark after Mark got another cube of stone?
What did John say when he found out that he was compatible with his brother?
When someone is considerate, they pay attention to the needs of others.
The considerate boy gave a present to his girlfriend on Valentine’s Day.
Crust is the tough outer part of a loaf of bread.
The little boy never ate the crust of his pizza.
To degrade someone means to cause people to have shame.
The teacher degraded Bob when she announced his poor performance to the class.
To escort people means to safely accompany them to a place.
A facility is a building that exists for a particular purpose.
A hound is a type of dog that is often used for racing or hunting.
The men took their hounds with them when they went on the hunting trip.
An ornament is an attractive object that people display in their homes.
Which of the following is an example of crust? a.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
We went to the track to watch the racing dogs run.
The outer part of a loaf of bread was a dark brown and smelled like wheat and honey.
The baseball player was yelled at by an angry person who watches a sports event.
People who celebrate Christmas hang colorful attractive objects on their trees.
What are the factors on which you judge for becoming a member in your club?
The church was made into a place people can go to be safe afterthe hurricane.
Concentration is an important mental ability to have when studying for a test.
The messy girl kept her clothes in a fiUe on the floor.
The boy sat by the small stream and tossed stones into it.
Buying the house will give the rights to me to redecorate it any way I want.
The Old Hound Elvis was a dog that loved to run.
He possessed all the criteria to be a great racing dog.
He had long legs, lean muscles, and a strong heart.
He was so good that he never lost a race in the northern hemisphere.
Spectators who bet on dog races always picked Elvis to win.
After ten years of racing, however, Elvis was getting old.
His faculties were not as strong as they used to be.
He threw Elvis in his car and took him to the middle of the forest.
There was a sign on the external door that said, “Dogs Welcome!” The interior of the building was painted blue, and shiny ornaments hung from the ceiling.
There was a heap of tasty bones and bread crusts for consumption.
Elvis learned there were kind people in the world after.
Elvis’s owner was not considerate, and he degraded the dog.
Elvis followed the brook to the big, impersonal city where pedestrians yelled at him.
In the interior of the facility, there was a heap of ornaments and bread crusts for consumption.
The old woman wanted to cater to Elvis’s needs at the sanctuary for old hounds.
What was true of Elvis’s faculties when he started getting old?
What did the old woman believe Elvis was entitled to?
What happened at all the races in the northern hemisphere?
To disprove something means to show that it is not true.
The scientist disproved the theory that the sun moved around the Earth.
When something is optic, it relates to the eyes or light.
Her blindness was caused by a problem with her optic nerve.
A premise is an idea on which something is based.
The premise of the movie that Bobbi and I watched was unrealistic.
When something is simultaneous, it occurs at the same time as something else.
The movement of the gears inside the watch was simultaneous.
A skeptic is a person who does not believe something.
The scientist showed the skeptic that dinosaurs did exist by providing evidence.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
We received humanitarian relief after I got a terrible haircut.
The boy waited for the Renaissance, which was going to start in the future.
Alice placed the ball on the rack where all her sport equipment was stored.
The woman liked the premise of the show, but she thought the acting was bad.
The boy was scared by the simultaneous sound of the thunder and the phone.
The map was informative and helped them from getting lost.
Kelly had only met her uncle once and didn’t know much about him.
In spring, all of the plants in the garden are covered with tiny buds.
The skeptic didn’t believe that the magician could actually make someone disappear.
The new hearing aid provides a wide range of optic choices.
He had forgot it by noon of the same day.
He had to specify to the waiter whether he wanted onions in his food or not.
The fruits looked real, but they were made of wax.
Her understanding has been a real asset in her successful career.
If you coordinate all of sounds, you can make music.
Next week, we’ll be studying humanitarian efforts around the world since the time of.
Over the weekend, I want each of you to wear a blindfold for an entire day.
He really didn’t think the assignment would be too challenging.
On Saturday morning, Sam took a piece of cloth and tied it around his head to cover his eyes.
He heard the voices of his parents and brothers but couldn’t specify where each voice was coming from.
He thought about how important hearing is for blind people.
Just then, he remembered he couldn’t see the words on the page.
After finishing breakfast, his brothers asked him to play soccer.
As he followed them, he accidentally walked into the baker’s rack.
He wouldn’t be able to coordinate his actions without being able to see.
Furthermore, he couldn’t do simultaneous activities because he had to make sure he was safe first.
Suddenly, he realized that though he couldn’t see, his other senses worked perfectly fine.
In fact, he began to realize new and different aspects of common objects.
For example, he took a flower bud and felt it with his finger.
He realized for the first time that it seemed to be covered with wax.
It showed him sight was an asset that should be appreciated and taught him to revere the talents of blind people.
Sam’s class is going to study humanitarian efforts since the time of the Renaissance next week.
At first, Sam’s hypothesis is that the assignment is going to be difficult.
When Sam goes into the kitchen, he reads a Braille newspaper.
Sam runs into the baker’s rack on his way outside.
Without his sense of sight, Sam has better spatial awareness and can coordinate his movements more easily.
What was the premise of the experiment, according to Sam’s teacher?
What did Sam realize when he couldn’t specify where the voices were coming from?
What aspect of the flower bud did Sam notice after he realized all his other senses worked fine?
After Sam’s theory was disproved, what was the impact the experiment had on him?
An accessory is a thing that is added to another thing to make it look better.
The store sold colorful accessories like bags, sunglasses, and makeup.
An acquisition is something that a person buys or gets in some way.
Marty was happy with his new acquisition: a very fast bicycle.
When something is adequate, it is good enough for something else.
Without adequate notice of the road block, they will have to turn around.
The fleet of ships spent a few days at the dock.
When something is innate, it is something that one is born with, it is not learned.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
As a result, they didn’t mind having their clothes 8_____________ with sea water.
The man had an acquisition for being mean to the people that he met.
We used the grid on the map to help us locate the museum.
Usually, he used them for his firm, which imported marble statues from other countries.
It had an elaborate painting on the side that showed a naval battle.
It also had some new updates to its computer system.
His favorite ship’s latest acquisition was a device with a small grid to show the ship’s exact location.
At daybreak, Ernest happily sailed the temperate waters until he was far from land.
There was an old man standing next to its mast.
There was also a boy with his head hanging over the boat’s edge.
Most people never realized, but Ernest had an innate desire to help people.
He began sailing toward them, eager to facilitate their rescue and thus solve their dilemma.
As he got closer to the boat, he was shocked by its simplicity.
The boat’s wood looked no stronger than cardboard, and the equipment was old.
Still, there were several large fish in a pouch in the boat.
He yelled, “Here! You can inflate this boat to get you back to land.”
He learned that it’s better not to help unless asked.
Ernest usually used his fleet for his firm that imported marble statues from other countries.
His favorite ship had updated accessories like a new grid.
When Ernest saw the old man standing next to the mast, he decided to go home.
Ernest offered the man and the boy a boat that inflates to facilitate their rescue.
Ernest had the innate desire to make a lot of money.
How does the author describe the clothes of the people in the boat?
Where did the people in the small boat keep their fish?
What did Ernest learn at the end of the story?
To knit is to make fabric by connecting strings together.
An outlook is a person’s opinion or way of thinking about something.
He changed his outlook about rats after he read a book about them.
When something is prehistoric, it is from a time when there was no written history.
The scientists found prehistoric pots used by the people in the area.
A proponent is a person who supports an idea or a plan.
What does a person with a good understanding of a budget take care of? a.
Which of the following might an archeological expert be interested in? a.
What does it mean to be a parachute addict? a.
To want to jump from a plane with a parachute c.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The teacher held classes in the outdoor area surrounded by walls on warm days.
The airport is usually hectic on Saturdays because many people were traveling.
The teacher made sure the correct answers matched with the questions on the test.
The student gave an example from an interview she heard on the radio.
The victim of the crime of tricking told the police about her experience.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
He wanted to refine the machine before he sold it.
The seat belt restricted the child’s movement in the car.
After an accident in the laboratory, hydrogen filled the air.
He thought that people should try to save the environment, but his brother thought it wasn’t worth trying.
After an hour, they came up with a great idea.
The people in the plane crash were saved by parachutes.
He told people he was selling medicine, but it was only river water.
The chocolate addict ate chocolate bars about once a month.
The archeology expert was called to study some ancient bones.
The children ran into the courtyard when it started raining.
The History of Parachutes Scientists who study archeology say that there may be some evidence of prehistoric.
But the first written history of the device comes from China about 2,100 years ago.
However, there is no archeological evidence that proves that an actual parachute was ever made.
Later, people from northern Africa and Italy also had ideas about a similar invention.
In fact, a Leonardo Da Vinci’s drawing corresponds closely with the modern parachute design!
In 1783, French scientist Sebastian Lenormand invented the first modern parachute.
Sebastian brainstormed with other scientists to come up with a way to help people jump safely out of burning buildings.
He thought the solution was to give people an object to restrict their speed while they traveled toward the ground.
Many people thought that he was up to some kind of fraud, but Sebastian had a lot of integrity.
He jumped out of a tree and found that the umbrellas worked.
He was one of the first people to ride in a hot air balloon powered by hydrogen.
He was a proponent of using the parachutes to exit from hot air balloons.
Starting in 1785, he used his dog to show that animals could land safely from hot air balloons by using.
Then, in 1793, he was faced with a chaotic experience.
The hot air balloon he was riding in burst and started.
Archeology experts cite an old Chinese book that describes a parachute that corresponds with modern parachutes.
Sebastian brainstormed with scientists to invent a device that would allow people to jump from buildings safely.
On Sebastian’s first jump, he used a large blanket to restrict his speed as he traveled to the ground.
Where did Sebastian jump with the parachute he refined and knitted?
An attorney is one who gives others advice about the law.
The attorney appeared in front of the judge for me.
To implicate someone is to show that they have done a crime or something bad.
The man was implicated in the theft at the store.
To stab means to cut someone or something with a sharp object like a knife.
He stabbed the fork into the potato and passed it to his daughter.
Having a lot of money is a stimulus for people to buy more things.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
He has always been a generous 2______________and wants to improve the school.
It was supposed to be a 4_____________ for more students to study there.
I may not be able to go to college next year.
His new stove will be a stimulus for him to cook at home more often.
Ellen didn’t like the color of her walls, so she painted graffiti on them.
I took a knife and severed the line from the pole to the fish’s mouth.
The food was being held on suspicion of committing two crimes in the city.
I spoke to my fellow teachers, and we all agreed to support the students at the rally.
The day before, a donor gave the school a painting with a sports.
The principal hung the painting in front of the office, hoping that it would be a stimulus for students to play sports.
There was graffiti on it, and it had many holes in it.
The worst part was that one of Billy’s fellow students said she thought she saw Billy do it!
Billy’s parents didn’t have enough money to pay for the painting and for his tuition.
Meyers received a packet with the videotape from the school.
It showed another student who resembled Billy walking up to the painting and writing on it.
Then the student took a knife by the shaft and started to stab large holes in it.
Finally, he severed the rope that held up the painting, and it fell to the floor.
Meyers, “When I graduate and go to university, I will major in law, so I can be a guardian of justice like you!”
A donor gave the school a painting with a sports theme as a stimulus for students to play sports.
Billy was implicated in the crime because a fellow student received a packet with a videotape showing him doing it.
Everybody gossiped about Billy, and even some of our kin think he did it.
The principal threatened to terminate Billy’s education if his parents didn’t pay his tuition.
What did the attorney suggest to the principal about the boy responsible for the crime?
Why did Billy say he wanted his major to be law when he went to university?
If someone is aggressive, then they constantly want to fight.
Nobody liked to play games with him because he was always too aggressive.
An arena is a building where people can watch sports and concerts.
The new arena was all set to hold the championship match.
The guards told the captive that there was no way he could escape the prison.
It was hard to believe that anyone could be his foe.
To meditate means to focus or think deeply in silence.
She liked to meditate for several hours of each day.
To provoke someone means to annoy them on purpose to cause violence.
The older boy provoked Paul by calling him mean names.
Rust is a red and brown coating on iron objects caused by water and air.
The old metal gate would not swing because the hinges were covered in rust.
If something is sacred, then it is worshipped and respected.
One religion in India will not harm cows because it believes that they are sacred.
Which would you most likely see in an auditorium? a.
Which of the following is a dumb thing to do? a.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
His reign only lasted three years before he became sick and passed away.
The Soldier’s Decision A soldier was captured while fighting in an enemy king’s land.
For these fights, the king had built several large arenas.
He often awarded the winners by setting them free or even having them join his elite army corps.
The soldier, however, decided he had seen too much violence.
The night before his first match, he made a risky decision.
He knew he may never be set free, but it was a decision that he was willing to accept.
In the morning, he was led from the prisoners’ compound to one of the king’s arenas.
A gate coated in rust stood between him and the auditorium’s floor.
He was worried, but he knew what he had to do.
When the gate opened, he calmly walked to the center of the arena and sat.
His foe Darius, who was skilled in the realm of sword fighting and was typically not very aggressive, would not fight the quiet soldier until he attacked Darius first.
Darius tried to provoke him by hacking at the air close to his head with his sword.
He sat quietly, as if he were dumb, and looked calmly up at the sky.
Even when Darius nicked him on the cheek with the edge of his sword, the soldier did not move.
At last he threw down his sword and shield and gave up.
Never in any battle had he seen someone so brave.
The soldier’s actions proved to the king and everyone in the arena that peace was more powerful than fighting.
The gate between the soldier and the auditorium was coated with rust.
The prisoner was led from the arena to the compound.
While he meditated, the soldier was distracted by his opponent.
The king gave the brave soldier amnesty and made him join his elite army corps.
What was commonplace during the reign of the enemy king?
In what realm did the soldier’s opponent Darius have skill?
What did the quiet soldier prove by refusing to engage his foe in combat?
A catastrophe is an unexpected event that causes great suffering or damage.
It was a catastrophe for my family when my dad lost his job.
The fore of something is the front part of it.
The teacher’s desk is at the fore of the classroom.
When something is intricate, it has many small parts or details.
When something is secondhand, it has been owned by someone else.
Her secondhand jeans were a bit faded in the front.
To submerge something means to put it below the surface of a liquid.
Sam thought of a good tactic in order to attract more business.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The enclosed area in the harbor for loading ships is very busy this time of day.
Be sure not to lie about the facts about the crime.
The police need to know everything in order to help us.
The women sat on the front part of the ship and enjoyed the warm sun.
I have to add a stop to our trip, so adjust your plans in a wav that depends on the situation.
To understand this show, you have to know the general situation that relates to it.
The new sewing machine was made up of many small parts and details.
Let’s hope that our plans do not have a part of one occupying the space of the other.
The city has decided to give a particular description of this area as a non-smoking zone.
I think the gears need a little more oily substance used to make parts work smoothly.
Jackets help to offset the effect of a cold wind.
I need to distort my homework if I’m going to get it turned in by tomorrow.
They had to water the tree four times a day.
The intricate bench was just a large, unpainted piece of wood.
We walked to the docks to watch ships pull in and out.
The lion submerged out of the bushes and attacked its prey.
She was noted for creating some imaginative tactics to claim victory.
The guide asked us to be very quiet, so we acted accordingly.
The chef arranged the slices of bread so that they overlapped each other.
We knew from the beginning that the genuine man was not who he claimed to be.
The buoy over there warns ships that the water is too shallow.
At the front we could see where we were going.
The grease made it easy to find a good parking spot.
The fireman who saved the family was designated the “hero of the month.”
Check the context for spelling errors before you turn it in to the teacher.
This looks like a good place to drop the boat’s anchor and relax in the sun.
Jane’s Pride Jane and her father, Mike, owned a secondhand boat.
She learned how to put grease on the intricate gears of the motor.
She learned how to submerge the anchor and secure it by putting a rope in a slot.
Jane liked helping her father, but she thought that she wasn’t very good at it.
Mike wanted to prove to her that she was indeed capable and important.
He thought of a tactic to test Jane’s skills in the context of a catastrophe.
He shouted, “Jane, I can’t get out! You have to get back to the dock and find help!”
She thought she might make her usual mistakes, which would precipitate a disaster.
She pulled up the anchor with all of her might.
She steered the boat around buoys where the water was shallow.
When they got to shore, Mike came out from under the deck.
To honor his daughter, Mike decided to rename his boat.
He designated it “Jane’s Pride” and painted the name on the fore of the ship.
Jane thought she would precipitate a disaster if she omitted her frequent mistakes.
Jane submerged the anchor and secured it by putting a rope in a slot.
Mike thought of a tactic to test Jane’s skills in the context of a catastrophe.
Where did Jane have to steer the boat to find help?
What was the first thing Jane did after she decided to listen to her dad and act accordingly?
On which part of the boat did they paint the name?
When Jane overlapped the sails, what was she trying to offset?
An antibiotic is a medical drug used to kill bacteria and treat infections.
The doctor gave me a shot of an antibiotic when I got the flu.
A circuit is a piece of an electronic device that allows electricity to flow.
Be very careful not to shock yourself when fixing an electrical circuit.
An equivalent is an amount or value that is the same as another amount or value.
When someone is immune to a disease, they cannot be affected by it.
Children usually get shots to make them immune to certain diseases.
A microchip is a small device inside a computer that holds information.
I can put more data on my computer if I buy a more powerful microchip.
A phase is a stage in a process or the gradual development of something.
The first phase in the recycling project involves finding volunteers to help out.
To pinch means to take a piece of skin between one’s fingers and squeeze.
When something is quantum, it relates to the behavior of atomic particles.
A spiral is a shape which winds round and round in a larger and larger circle.
When something is viral, it is a disease or infection that is caused by a virus.
The girl was in bed fora week when she had a viral infection.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Walking was the most common form of transportation in the big city.
We are now ready to begin the first particular stage in the process.
Do the doctors know if the condition is a disease caused by a virus?
Some people don’t believe in taking drugs used to treat infections.
We were offered a bottle of sparkling cider to go well with our meal.
I seem to have lost some of the information that is put into a computer.
I wish they wouldn’t store personal information in the collection of data in the computer.
His grandmother loves to take a piece of skin and squeeze his cheeks.
I don’t really understand my body’s wav that chemical processes cause food to be used.
A spring looks like a shape which winds round and round.
The microchip was damaged when she spilled water on the computer.
People with fast metabolisms are usually thin and in good shape.
You should pinch your homework if you want to get it turned in on time.
I was amazed by the aggregate total of donated gifts and money.
This tuba is the equivalent of a set of drums.
The bond between humans and computers is becoming more intimate than ever before.
They are made up of compressed electrical circuits that can detect and record data about the body.
They are tiny, but they hold the equivalent amount of data as most computers.
A microchip is put to use inside a person with a simple procedure.
First, a doctor must put data about the patient onto a chip.
Input about the person’s age, race, gender, and medical history is stored on the chip.
The second phase of the process involves putting it in the person’s skin.
The doctor pinches a piece of skin and cuts a tiny hole with a tool shaped like a spiral.
The chip is inserted, and the skin is allowed to heal.
At last, it begins the task of putting data into its database.
Microchips scan the patient’s body to record what is happening on the quantum level.
They can find problems with the person’s metabolism and organs.
They can find the aggregate number of immune and infected cells and present the results in a ratio.
They can even tell doctors what type of antibiotic to give to the patient!
To recover the chip’s data, the doctor uses a special magnet that copies it.
This way, the doctor can put the information from the chip onto a computer.
Then they can find out exactly what is wrong with the person.
The idea of putting chips in humans is still very new.
Scientists and doctors are hopeful about the future uses of microchips.
Someday, all new babies might get a microchip soon after they are born.
Doctors will be able to know about any problems from the very beginning.
It is obvious that medicine and computers complement each other well.
Chips express the aggregate number of immune and intimate cells in a ratio.
A doctor pinches the skin and cuts a hole with a tool shaped like a spiral.
What holds the equivalent amount of storage as most computers?
After the input is stored on the chip, what is the next phase of the process?
What do microchips do to record what is happening on the quantum level?
An attribute is a characteristic of a person or thing.
He isn’t very clever, but he does have some other positive attributes.
If something is fluorescent, it is such a bright color that it seems to give off light.
She highlighted the key words in the document with a fluorescent yellow pen.
My father was furious when he read my bad school report.
A gulf is a gap between people who do not understand each other.
There has been a gulf between James and Tony since their parents died.
A participant is someone who joins in a social event or competition.
If something is vague, it is not clear, and it gives very few details.
I asked him about his mother’s health, but he was very vague about it.
Which of the following would NOT be considered a subject studied in humanities? a.
Which of the following could NOT be used to make a knot? a.
Which of the following is similar in meaning to the word dash? a.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Kevin was very vague about his job interview, and he told me all the details.
Liam had a plausible reason for not doing his work, saying aliens took it.
The two brothers looked so much alike that they could be clones.
My mother was furious when she heard that I passed all my exams.
I was filled with disgust when I heard the news that he had lied to all of us.
Around the world, there are lots of different marriage rituals.
We had lots of participants in the fishing competition last Saturday.
Kay is a linguist and will give a lecture on the best way to learn a language.
You should wear dark clothes for the interview, such as your fluorescent jacket.
I can’t use this thread for sewing because it has too many knots in it.
Jan wanted to make a cake, so she went to the shop to buy some cosmetics.
The lesson was long and boring, and all the students felt astounded.
I think Tom should get the job because he has all the right attributes.
You shouldn’t use colloquial language when you make formal presentations.
They were so alike that few people could tell the siblings.
They even used the same colloquial language as each other.
One summer, Katie decided to be a participant at a summer camp in France.
Alice wasn’t interested in the French language, so she didn’t go.
But she felt angry that Katie wanted to spend the summer away from her.
Katie was now bilingual, and she looked completely different! She was wearing nice clothes, cosmetics and looked skinnier.
She was just wearing a fluorescent t-shirt, and her hair had knots in it.
When Alice asked Katie about France, Katie was vague and didn’t say much.
It made Alice furious and filled her with disgust because in the past they’d always told each other everything.
But it’s totally plausible for twins to have different interests.
The girls looked like clones, but they used different colloquial language.
The twins’ attributes were different in that Katie was bilingual and Alice liked humanities.
Alice’s hair was in knots when she dashed to the airport to meet her sister.
Alice was astounded when she saw Katie wearing a fluorescent t-shirt.
When the gulf formed between the sisters, they stopped speaking to each other in detail.
Why didn’t Alice want to be a participant at the summer camps with the other linguists?
How did Alice feel when she saw Katie looking skinny and wearing cosmetics?
Why was Alice furious and filled with disgust when Katie answered her questions in a vague way?
What ritual did the siblings always do before their birthday?
An acid is a chemical that can burn or dissolve other substances.
In chemistry class, we mixed two acids together and watched the reaction.
A coalition is a group of people or organizations working for a common purpose.
The companies formed a coalition to make trade less expensive.
Ethics are moral beliefs or rules about right or wrong.
The act of stealing certainly doesn’t go against some people’s ethics.
A framework is a set of rules or ideas that people use to solve problems.
His ideas fit into the framework of a successful business plan.
To manufacture something means to make it in a factory.
Nectar is a sweet liquid produced by flowers that bees and other insects collect.
I have a notion that this route would get us to the beach.
When something is straightforward, it is good because it is easy to understand.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
The students asked the school’s 3______________to buy a better kind of meat.
The meat served there is too high in fat and 4_____________
Citizens formed a 7_____________ because the city’s air was making people ill.
Elderly people and infants were the most 8______________to becoming sick.
The deceptive man was very open and honest about his plans.
Eating a lot of fast food raises people’s cholesterol levels.
The group decided on a framework for the new project.
Businesses try to minimize the amount of money they can make.
He had a notion that the speaker was not really an expert on the subject.
The maid used a kind of acid to dissolve the stains on the floor.
It is important for a judge to have good ethics.
The lawyer hoped that the witness would tell an explicit version of the story.
My father works in construction while my mom has an administrative job.
Be sure to eliminate all the ingredients to make a great cake.
All of the prisoners formed an administration where they played games.
Dry weather, followed by sudden floods, caused the erosion in the valley.
The biotechnology company only made things from nonliving rocks and sand.
Jack got a new job at a biotechnology company called Bioco.
Jack’s job was to use a tiny mechanism to get nectar from flowers.
Jack liked his job, and he thought that Bioco was a caring company.
However, Jack soon learned that the company wasn’t as kind as he first thought.
Bioco’s motto was “Make the Earth a Better Place.” However, this motto was deceptive.
The company actually did a number of really bad things to the environment.
The company produced a lot of smog and harmful acid.
Bioco poured the acid in a nearby river, which caused erosion and made fish prone to illness.
After a few weeks at the new job, Jack saw all the bad things Bioco was doing.
He had always had strong ethics, and he knew he had to do something.
One day, while the Bioco workers were eating in the cafeteria, Jack stood up and gave a speech.
I have a notion that we can fix them if we form a coalition.
We can go to the administration and tell them we’ll quit if they don’t eliminate the problems.
They went to the administrative offices and demanded that Bioco stop damaging the environment, or they all would quit.
Jack, his supervisor, and his coworkers spent the next month designing a new framework for the company.
They cleaned up the acid from the river and minimized the amount of air pollution the company released.
Bioco was a biotechnology company that manufactured diabetes and high cholesterol.
The new framework involved an explicit plan to fix the smog and acid problems.
The waste acid caused erosion and made fish prone to illness.
After the company minimized Jack’s ethics, the motto became apt.
What did Jack stand up to do in the cafeteria?
What did the coalition of workers threaten to do if the administration didn’t eliminate the problems?
What did the boss in the offices say after the workers were straightforward with him?
Breadth is the distance from one side to the other side of something.
The breadth of the northern wall of the house is twenty meters.
After the other company won the account, our salespeople were filled with despair.
After the light broke, there were fragments of glass to clean up.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Which would help you see through the gloom of a day? a.
What describes someone whose waist has a large circumference? a.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The night was extremely dark because little light came from the curved shaped moon.
They moved without a purpose around the mall while waiting for their friend to get off of work.
The distance from one side to the other of a baby’s hand is very small.
Mom couldn’t fix the bowl because a small part of it was missing.
A lot of energy is stored within just one simple smallest unit of matter.
The bee’s stinger was placed firmly within the skin of his right hand.
Guarding the camp was a lonely job, so he gladly accepted the young man’s company.
When it’s low on fuel, the heater emits a small level of heat.
He was so concerned about his position to others in school that he studied very hard.
How Comet Got His Tail A solitary rock roamed through the cold gloom of outer space.
In the vast and beautiful galaxy, it was only a tiny rock.
It flew by beautiful crescent moons that were covered with craters and moon dust.
It was surrounded by beauty and greatness, yet it was.
Oh, I wish I had a higher status in the galaxy.
Suddenly, the ice that was embedded in the rock’s tiny cracks melted and became steam.
Then the steam extended behind the comet to form a brilliant tail.
The tail shined with all the colors of the spectrum.
It realized that the star helped it change its appearance.
The little rock drifted through the debris of broken atoms.
The gigantic planet was in the shape of a sphere.
The ice embedded in the little rock bubbled with all the colors of the spectrum.
The star radiated its light hotter and brighter than ever before.
The little rock wished it had a higher status in the galaxy.
While roaming through the gloom of the galaxy, how did the little rock feel?
What objects had craters and was in the shape of a shiny crescent?
How much larger was the circumference of the planet compared to the breadth of the rock?
Why was the little fragment of rock filled with despair?
Hygiene is the conditions or methods needed for health and cleanliness.
People who brush their teeth at least twice a day are practicing good hygiene.
To mend something means to fix it when it is broken or damaged.
Mother mended the rip in my pants with a piece of cloth.
If something is trendy, then it is very popular and new.
The mayor had a new bridge built whereby the citizens could cross the river.
Which of the following means the closest to mend? a.
Which of following would NOT be considered part of an office’s personnel? a.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
His company gives work to about 100 people in the community.
Joan was forced to leave from the auditorium for her hostile comments.
Mv new apartment in the city was complete with bed, sofa, and TV.
The prisoner’s condition for health and cleanliness was absolutely terrible.
I’m going to rent the apartment for only six months.
He was lucky to find employees who are honest and hardworking.
We need to have our system of pipes that brings water into our house checked.
The popular and new fashion these days for men is boots.
Did you remember to pay the company that provides our water?
The school sent a second bus whereby the students could get to school.
The dam on the lake became bankrupt, and soon water broke through the cracks.
The restaurant was a trendy place where all the rich and famous people went.
The first three cars to finish were given an award, but the forthcoming car got nothing.
She made a mistake and accidentally walked into the mandatory bathroom.
After he furnished dinner, the host gave him some dessert.
Rather than conforming to one religion, Mary chose what she liked from all of them.
I knew something was wrong with the plumbing once the hot water stopped working.
Because of an error, the game was given an extension of five more minutes.
He’s very hygienic because he bathes once a week and seldom changes his clothes.
Tom didn’t want to talk about his father’s new job.
There was too much sugar in the recipe, so she leased the amount with a spoon.
Because the rent was so expensive, all of the tenants are probably wealthy people.
They were expelled from the restaurant because they couldn’t pay their bill.
In order to buy a house, most people have to get a mortgage.
The Resourceful Landlord A kind landlord was afraid that he would lose his apartment building.
Without tenants to lease the rooms, the landlord would be unable to pay his mortgage.
He’d be bankrupt, and the bank would take his building.
But he didn’t have the money whereby he could employ the personnel needed to make the repairs.
It would seem like he did not want to conform to the city’s codes before the forthcoming inspection.
He had requested an extension, but it was denied by the city.
He held a meeting with his tenants and explained the unfortunate situation.
The tenants were all sad for the kind old man.
Another tenant was a carpenter; he mended the holes in the floor and walls.
Others cleaned the building from top to bottom so that it was more hygienic.
They even furnished some of the apartments with new beds, dressers, and chairs.
When they were done, all of the people dispersed, and the landlord went home to rest.
When the deadline of the inspection arrived, the apartment building was hygienic and safe.
His old building now looked like one of the trendiest buildings in town.
The building passed its inspection, and the landlord and the tenants had a big party.
If the tenants didn’t pay the mortgage, the landlord could not pay his lease and would be bankrupt.
The landlord did not have money whereby he could employ personnel.
The city would expel everyone if the building did not pass the inspection for safety and hygiene.
The hairdresser mended the holes in the floors and walls.
After everyone helped to fix it, the building looked like one of the trendiest buildings in town.
In addition to dressers, what did the tenants furnish some of the apartments with?
If the landlord did not conform to the city’s mandatory hygienic standards, what would happen to the tenants?
What happened to the landlord’s request for an extension to the forthcoming deadline?
What did the tenant who had worked for the city’s utilities do to the building’s plumbing?
What did the landlord do after all of the people dispersed?
A bias is a person’s likelihood to like one thing more than another thing.
The mothers had a natural bias for their own child’s picture.
Only small fish lived in the shallow waters of the creek.
An incline is a sharp rise in something, especially a hill or mountain.
This mountain has one of the steepest inclines in the world.
If something is nasty, then it is not nice or pleasant.
The rotten apple left a nasty taste inside her mouth.
He was talking loudly, so he did not perceive that the music had stopped.
A stereotype is a general but often incorrect idea about a person or thing.
A termite is an insect that lives in groups and feeds on wood.
A twig is a short and thin branch from a tree or bush.
They started the fire with a handful of dry twigs.
Which of the following might be eaten by a termite? a.
How would you describe someone who could NOT perceive sound? a.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
The path leading out of the 1_____________ was very steep.
When they reached the top, they had to rest because of their 2___________
He thought that all their customs and ideas were 4_____________
They were all going to eat a 8_____________ that had fallen off a tree.
They drank it because they hoped it would beneficial to their 10________
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The kids gathered short, thing branches for their school art project.
The glue was covered with a substance that made things stick to it.
Early rocket development was simple and basic compared to what we have in the 21st century.
Monkeys, apes, and humans are some of the few animals with opposable thumbs.
After walking 12 kilometers, I was filled with a sense of extreme tiredness.
The Man and the Monkey While flying over a jungle, a wealthy executive’s private plane crashed.
The arrogant executive, though, didn’t care about the welfare of the pilot and crew.
Rather, he thought he could walkout of the jungle and find a town to stay in.
He followed a trail through a canyon and along a creek.
If the arrogant executive had stopped to look around, he might have perceived the jungle’s beauty.
But he was in a nasty mood and had no care for the aesthetic value of the jungle.
He continued to walk up the steep incline of the jungle’s hills.
He then used the twig like a drill to make a hole in the mound.
Then very carefully, it removed the twig from the hole.
Instead of eating the bugs, the monkey offered them to the executive, but he didn’t want what the monkey offered.
He shouted at the monkey, “Get away from me, you stupid primate!”
It knew how to find food, whereas the executive did not.
He refused the help of the monkey, thereby leaving himself to starve.
When the executive was finally found, he was very skinny and sick.
Because he held a bias against the primitive ways of the monkey, he had gone hungry and almost died.
The executive didn’t understand that it was his arrogant attitude that had caused all of his problems.
The executive followed a trail through a canyon and along a creek.
The executive was in a nasty mood, so he did not see the aesthetic value of the jungle.
The executive walked up the small incline of the jungle’s hills.
What was on the twig that made it sticky enough to capture termites?
What happened to the executive because of his bias against the monkey’s primitive ways?
What did the monkey use like it was a drill?
What did the executive never perceive about his arrogant attitude?
If something is done on one’s behalf, it is done for that person by another.
The original speaker was sick, so his son gave the speech on his behalf.
An oracle is person who speaks with gods and gives advice about the future.
The king went to the oracle to ask if going to war was a good idea.
To orbit something means to move around it in a continuous, curving path.
A preview is an opportunity to see something before it is available to the public.
The band played us a preview of their new song.
Burglaries seem to recur over and over in our neighborhood.
To stall means to stop a process and continue it at a later time.
If you give the car a push, it won’t stall.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
While I’m gone, Sarah will turn in my homework on my 2_________
He can make several by baking a single 6______________of bread.
In the past, people asked 9______________how the gods moved the planets.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
My earlier report was just a short account of the long, difficult book.
In ancient Greece, the person who gives advice often gave information about the future.
The top of the fence was perfectly flat and level with the ground.
I know about the piece because I saw the viewing before it was available to the public.
The baker made an extra piece of bread for the homeless man in the alley.
She is embarrassed of some of her not expressed or shown thoughts.
The fisherman liked to make a low, continuous noise while he waited for a bite.
The travelers were given a place to stay, but they had to supply their own food.
The company had to stop the process of the production of the dangerous toy.
We saw a cute polar bear jump into the water from the edge of the large mass of ice.
Cosmo was scared that his dreams were a preview of what was going to happen on his flight the next day.
Cosmo was a supernatural being who was about to turn 15 years old.
In his culture, boys of his age were required to participate in an important rite.
They were given wings and instructed to orbit the Earth.
Cosmo certainly wanted to be a man, but he was scared.
He went to the oracle of a god named Dano.
What if I get tired? What if my strength stalls, and I can’t stay in the air.
You have all the relevant skills in your personal inventory that have been building up over the years.
To ease your worry, let me tell you a little about what will happen tomorrow.
You’ll keep flying north until you come to the Himalayas.
The mountaintops will look like small loaves of bread at such a high distance.
The rivers of the world will look like pieces of blue string that cross the globe.
Keep your body horizontal when flying against the winds of the Pacific Ocean.
Keep your eyes open and enjoy the beauty of the Earth.
Cosmo replied, “Thanks for the overview of my journey, I’ll do my best.” The next morning, Cosmo was provided with a divine set of wings and sent on his way.
He flapped his wings and went high above the Earth.
After a while, his inward thoughts were no longer about falling.
He was actually having fun! He began to hum a song as he enjoyed the view.
When he reached home, his tribe was there to greet him.
Cosmo was scared that his recurring dreams of the previous nights were a preview of what would happen.
Supernatural boys of Cosmo’s age participated in an important rite.
In Dano’s summary, he told Cosmo to keep his body horizontal against the winds of the Indian Ocean.
Dano flapped the wings he was provided with and orbited the globe.
Cosmo sang a tune while he flew and enjoyed the view.
What inward thoughts were no longer relevant to Cosmo after he started having fun?
What did Dano tell Cosmo that the tops of the Himalaya Mountains will look like?
What did Cosmo say after he thanked the oracle for the overview?
The oracle told Cosmo that the rivers of the world will look like what?
What did the chief declare on behalf of the tribe?
When something is cellular, it relates to the cells of animals or plants.
She used a microscope to see the activity at a cellular level.
A fantasy is a pleasant situation that people think about but is unlikely to happen.
Becoming an astronaut is a fantasy shared by many children.
When something is internal, it exists or happens inside a person, object, or place.
We removed the outer case to reveal the computer’s internal wires.
My lazy husband does a minimal amount of work around the house.
To revive someone or something means to restore health or life to them.
She revived the feeling of warmth in her leg by rubbing it softly.
To substitute something or someone means to have them take the place of another.
When I ran out of juice, I had to substitute water to drink in the morning.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The child received treatment for his mental condition after he became depressed.
The medical students learned which processes were occurring inside living things.
Unicorns only exist in a situation people think about but will not happen.
When he begins his rule, people will have to change to the new situation.
At the relating to cells level, plants and animals are quite similar.
We thought his rules were too severe because they cannot be changed.
The lively and creative scientist invented a new formula to help stop aging.
The creative inventor was a first person to discover the process of electricity.
There is a specific number of events that come in an order in which to use the tools.
The brilliant doctor brought back to life the dead patient.
The surgeon made a small cut into the patient’s skin.
The building materials must be transferred to the new site.
The rigid rules were confusing because they changed all the time.
The baby prescribed his mother to get a piece of candy.
You can observe water’s transition into ice when the temperature gets cold.
I never want to get a new house, so I substitute the one I have.
The dynamic teacher thought of new and exciting teaching methods.
The pieces must be put on the machine in the correct sequence.
Hot dogs are one of my favorite surgical foods to revive.
The heredity expert can tell us how traits are passed on from a father.
Please take the big, cellular pieces to the recycling center.
The hours of therapy were worth it when I could move my arm again.
The internal roof got covered in snow after the storm.
I was still hungry because I only ate a minimal amount of food at dinner.
The First Organ Transplant In 1954, a man named Richard was dying of kidney disease.
Richard’s twin brother, Robert, was willing to donate one of his kidneys to his dying brother.
At the time, however, no doctor had ever performed a successful internal organ transplant.
The idea of taking an organ out of one person and putting it into another was just a fantasy.
But the brothers decided to be brave and found a doctor who could make organ transplants a reality.
Since Richard and Robert were twins, their heredity was identical.
Therefore, Robert’s working kidney could be substituted for Richard’s bad one.
Richard’s body could adapt to the new organ if the operation was done correctly.
Murray made sure his surgeons followed a rigid sequence of directions so that no mistakes were made.
First, they made a minimal cut in Richard’s side and removed the bad kidney.
Then, they made another small cut in Robert’s side, removed his kidney, and transferred it into Richard’s body.
After the surgery, it was clear that both brothers were going to be OK.
Richard’s new kidney worked great! Doctors prescribed medicine for the pain caused by the surgery.
Since Richard was still weak, he used physical therapy to revive his strength.
At last, Richard’s transition into a healthy, happy person was complete.
His success gave other doctors confidence to try organ transplants themselves.
The twins’ kidneys were identical on the cellular level because of their heredity.
The dynamic surgeons followed a rigid sequence of directions to avoid mistakes.
Richard’s body adapted to the kidney that was transferred from his brother.
Where did the surgeons make minimal cuts in the respective bodies of each twin?
What was the result of Richard’s transition after his therapy?
An autobiography is a true story of a person’s life written by that person.
If someone is gracious, then they are kind and helpful to those who need it.
The operator was gracious enough to help me find his number.
When children are naughty, they behave badly or do not do what they are told.
The boy had to go to his room because he was being naughty.
An orangutan is a large ape with red and brown hair and long arms.
Philanthropy is the act of helping others, without wanting anything in return.
The wealthy business owner is well known for his acts of philanthropy.
A recipient of something is the person who receives it.
To thrive means to do well and be successful, healthy, or strong.
He may be an old man, but he continues to thrive.
When something is ultimate, it is the final result or aim of a long series of events.
By trying hard in school, I will reach my ultimate goal of becoming a doctor.
What is the ultimate result of going to college? a.
What happens if you insulate a house in the winter? a.
Choose the one that is opposite in meaning to the given word.
Make sure to misplace your money so that you will always have it.
The orangutans at the zoo swung so gracefully from the trees.
The tigers in the aquarium loved to run and play.
Plants will thrive if they are not given any water.
The ultimate result of the game was a win for the home team.
Some people play the lottery in hopes that they will improve their lives.
I probed the audience because I didn’t want to hear what they had to say.
I insulated my room with blankets to keep the loud noises out.
After he calmed down, Joe made a photocopy of the check in case he misplaced the original one.
He sat and thought about what he wanted to do with the money.
He didn’t want to spend it in an arbitrary way.
The cages were too small, and they weren’t insulated from the cold.
He took out some stationery and wrote a letter to the zoo.
He offered to help the zoo buy huge cages for the large mammals and reptiles.
He offered to buy healthy food for the orangutans to increase their longevity.
He even said that he would buy new glass walls for the aquarium because the old ones were cracked.
He probed Joe to learn why he spent his money to improve the zoo.
It wasn’t a social convention for a person to be so gracious.
Joe was the recipient of a check because he won the lottery.
He wanted to buy new glass walls for the aquarium because the old ones were cracked.
If Joe wrote an autobiography, he would write about the norms of the overloaded aquarium.
Joe made a photocopy of the check in case he misplaced the original one.
When Joe opened the door, he saw one of the naughty neighborhood children.
What did Joe thinkthe naughty children were doing to him?
What did Joe improve to help the orangutans increase their longevity?
What was the purpose of the zookeeper wanting to probe Joe with questions?
If Joe were to write an autobiography, how would he describe this day?
An artifact is an old object made by humans that is historically interesting.
The chronology of a series of past events is when they happened.
We learned the chronology of World War II in history class.
An excerpt is a short piece of writing or music taken from a larger piece.
I didn’t listen to the entire symphony online, but I did play an excerpt.
To recruit people means to select them to join or work for an organization.
A register is an official list or record of people or things.
Ata wedding there is register for all of the guests to sign.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The circus performer held on to the elephant’s long, curved tooth.
The salesman assured me that the artwork was not false or an imitation.
At the end of the year, our club will select a new person to join.
Janet isn’t able to arrive at the right time at all.
It is difficult to follow the series of past events and times of computer programming.
Please stand and read a(an) short piece of writing taken from a larger piece.
I took a class at the university where I wrote simple and direct poetry.
The Iliad is an wonderful long book about great events.
Her mother was a dancer of some quality of being well known for doing good things.
Jen’s New Job The history museum needed to recruit a new tour guide.
She was chosen because she was friendly, punctual and had a great attitude.
On her first day, Jen got to work and prepared to give her first tour.
She saw that the Queen of England and a diplomat were visiting the museum.
She thought, “It’s my very first day, and I have to impress a monarch! I hope I don’t humiliate myself in front of a person of such renown!”
She took a deep breath and said, “Hello, everyone! I’m going to talk to you about the chronology of ancient Egypt.” As she turned around to show the group some artifacts, she bumped into a fossil of an authentic elephant tusk.
It fell to the ground and broke into a million pieces! “Oh no!” said Jen in a subtle voice.
The rest of the tour did not go any better.
She tripped over an antique vase and broke a piece off of it.
As she was reading an excerpt from a lyric poem, she sneezed and tore a page of the epic.
You just have to be a little more careful and work hard to become the best at your job.
In time, Jen became the best tour guide at the museum.
The museum director interviewed dozens of applicants when he recruited a new tour guide.
Jen did not want to humiliate herself in front ofthe diplomat and the monarch.
The queen bumped into the fossil of an authentic elephant tusk.
Jen was chosen for the job because she was friendly, punctual, and had a register.
What did Jen say she hoped for in a subtle voice?
What chronology did Jen want to talk about to her tour group?
What happened as Jen was reading the excerpt from the epic lyric poem?
To compromise is to agree to something that is not exactly what you want.
We both compromised about the game we decided to play.
A crook is someone who is not honest or who commits crimes.
The manager was arrested by the police for being a crook.
An enigma is someone or something that is mysterious or hard to understand.
The theft of the paintings is an enigma to the investigators.
Innocence is a lack of experience of difficult or complex things in life.
Everyone who met her found her innocence to be charming.
To merge two things is to combine them into one whole thing.
The storm clouds merged into one large menacing cloud that filled the sky.
When something is moderate, it is not too big or too small in size or amount.
It takes a moderate amount of patience to be around small children all day.
A perception of a situation is a way of thinking about it or understanding it.
Since he couldn’t see, his perception of life was much different than mine.
My aunt is very talkative whenever she is on the phone.
To tramp is to put your feet down in a loud, heavy way as you walk.
The baby tramped across the floor as he was learning to walk.
If someone is too talkative during a movie, then others may______
How should someone deal with another that is overwhelming them? a.
Which of the following would have the most innocence? a.
Where would a crook most likely end up for doing something wrong? a.
What is a boat most likely to tow behind it? a.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
I met a very friendly girl on my first day of school.
Marty walked heavily across the kitchen to the back door.
The man had dishonestly changed the game so that he would win every time.
The paint colors combined to make new ones on the canvas.
Choose the one that is similar in meaning to the given word.
Jill’s perception of the movie was opposite to many viewers.
Tonya’s new car is a hybrid that runs on gas and electricity.
It is such burden to drive two hours to work each day.
The enigma was so simple that a child could find a solution.
Her innocence reminded many of us when we were young.
I crafted the airplane out of pieces of old wood.
The Demon’s Bridge A young woman’s cow had crossed the river in the morning when the water level was.
But when the woman returned with her dog to get the cow, she was overwhelmed by how high the water had risen.
Even if she crossed, she still couldn’t tow her cow back through the river.
The young woman’s perception of him was that he was a sociable.
Oh, but how can I pay you for your work? Let’s compromise.
She pulled a piece of bread from her pocket and threw it across the bridge.
He suddenly changed into a hybrid of a human and a fish.
The woman tramped across the bridge to the other side and had a happy reunion with.
The woman’s perception was that though the man was talkative and sociable, he was also an enigma.
When the young woman returned, she was overwhelmed by the moderate water level.
The fragile young woman thought she might be a burden to the man.
While crafting the bridge, the man merged the pieces with amazing speed.
The woman tramped across the bridge and had a happy reunion with the man.
What did the man change into a hybrid of after the dog crossed the bridge?
Why was the young woman unable to tow her cow across the river?
What did the water demon call the woman just before he dove into the river?
No part of this book n ay be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.f Acquisitions Editor: Fidel Cruz Project Coordinator: Annie Cho Design: Design Plus.
The 600 words in each book of this series along with the additional target words presented in the appendices included in the first three books of the series are the most useful words in English.
They were found by analysis of a collection of English course books from various levels in the primary, secondary and tertiary school systems.
The words included in this series were chosen because they occurred many times in different levels of these materials.
Because of the way that they were chosen, these words have the following characteristics:
No matter what English course you are studying, the words in these books will be of value to you.
These books as a whole cover a large proportion of the words in any spoken or written text.
They also cover at least 90% of the words in conversation.
The activities in these books are specially designed to make use of important learning conditions.
Firstly, the words are introduced using sentence definitions and an example sentence.
The activities that follow in the units encourage learners to recall the meanings and forms of the words.
Some activities also make the learners think about the meaning of the words in the context of a sentence— a sentence different from the sentences that occurred in the introduction of the words.
Moreover, each unit ends with a story containing the target words.
While reading the story, the learners have to recall the meanings of the words and suit them to the context of the story.
Such activities help learners develop a better understanding of a common meaning for a given word which fits the different uses.
Illustrations for each target word are provided to help learners visualize the word as it is being used in the example sentence.
These word/image associations aim to help students grasp the meaning of the word as well as recall the word later.
It should be noted that words have more than one grammatical category.
However, this series focuses on the word’s most common form.
This is mentioned to remind learners that just because a word is labeled and utilized as a noun in this series does not mean that it can never be used in another form such as an adjective.
This series has simply focused on the word in the form that it is most likely to be expressed.
A well-balanced language course provides four major opportunities for learning: learning through input, learning through output, deliberate learning, and fluency development.
The highly structured activities in these books support all four types of learning opportunities.
In addition, learning can further be supported through the following activities:
Have students create vocabulary cards with one word from the unit on one side of the card and the translation of the word in the student’s first language on the other side.
Students should use the cards for study in free moments during the day.
Over several weeks, students will find that quick repeated studying for brief periods of time is more effective than studying for hours at one sitting.
Reading such books provides both enjoyment as well as meaning-focused input which will help the words stick in students’ memory.
Practice reading fluency to promote faster recall of word meaning for both sight recognition and usage.
Compass Publishing’s Reading for Speed and Fluency is a good resource for reading fluency material.
Reinforcement of the high-frequency vocabulary presented in this series is important across all the four language skills.
His specialist interests are language teaching methodology and vocabulary learning.
A cluster of things is a small group of them placed close together.
She held a large cluster of grapes in her hand.
When something is contemporary, it is related to the present time.
Legends say that music was given to men as a divine gift from the gods.
When it is humid, there is a lot of water in the air.
Paradise is the place or condition of happiness where things are perfect.
A plantation is a big farm that only grows certain kinds of crops.
In the 1800s, there were many cotton plantations in the southern US.
When something is soothing, it makes you calm or relaxed.
The texture of something is the way its surface looks and feels.
The texture of a rock found in the water is typically very smooth.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
It is quite surprising that people settled there at such a fast__________
Many___________ laws make it illegal for business to compete in unfairways.
Because it is quite___________on the island, various kinds of plants grow well there.
However, some people find it hard to eat because of its powerful__________
A ___________of people suggested that nearby cities could fight the invaders if they cooperated with each other.
As a result, everyone__________ their efforts and defeated the invaders.
This has an overall calming and___________ effect on the viewer.
A huge garden was___________ in the middle of the city.
During a four or five course meal, one should drink something to clean the __________ between courses.
The island of Oahu is not a natural like Maui.
A soothing cup of tea _ The odor of the cheese.
The History of Chocolate Many people believe that chocolate originally came from Europe.
Wild chocolate trees can grow easily in the humid Amazon rainforest.
Clusters of flowers growing on these trees turn to seeds.
Cacao beans are the ingredient needed to create sweet, soothing, and delicious chocolate treats.
The Mayan and Aztec cultures both thought that chocolate trees were brought from paradise by gods.
The Mayans and Aztecs used the beans from this divine tree to create a special beverage with a very pleasant odor.
Surprisingly, the Aztecs believed that it would be toxic to women and children.
Cortes became quite interested in the plantations where the Aztecs cultivated chocolate trees.
When he returned to Europe, he took cacao beans with him.
He introduced the people of Spain to the Aztecs’ chocolate beverage.
Over the next 100 years or so, kings, queens, and members of the upper class enjoyed drinking chocolate.
They enjoyed it even more once they learned to add sugar to the beverage! Soon, chocolate had spread all across Europe.
New machines allowed chocolate makers to perfect their products and produce them at a very rapid rate.
Preparing the beans in special ways brought out the aroma of chocolate.
The beans were combined with condensed milk to give the chocolate a smooth texture.
Today, contemporary chocolates with subtle flavors fill the shelves of expensive chocolate shops.
They will tell you that the flavor of high quality chocolate stays on the palate long after you finish it.
A Mark each statement T for true or F for false.
The Mayans and Aztecs said chocolate was a divine plant brought from paradise.
Beans were combined with condensed milk to give chocolate a smooth texture.
Which word is NOT used to describe chocolate in the reading?
Which of the following did NOT consume chocolate as a beverage? a.
Which group of people believed that chocolate was toxic to women and children? a.
What allowed chocolate to be produced at a rapid rate? a.
She had to go to the hospital after she was in a serious car accident.
Your conscience is your inner sense of what is right and wrong.
I recycle everything I can, so my conscience is clear!
Hay is dry grass used to feed animals or used as a covering.
I need to buy some more hay for the horse to sleep on.
If you are horrified, you are very shocked and feel upset.
I was horrified when I read about the old lady who was attacked.
A paddle is a piece of wood or plastic that moves a boat across water.
We need a paddle to help us move across the water.
When something is sour, it has a sharp and unpleasant taste.
I don’t like lemons because I think they are too sour.
A stake is a small, sharp piece of wood or metal that is put into the ground.
We marked our property by placing stakes into the ground.
The teenagers wrecked the house for no reason at all.
PAR'D' A Choose the right definition for the given word.
PjGMJ B Choose the right word for the given definition.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Tom was promoted, and now he is an important sea officer that controls military ships.
Some people thought that the meal was too sharp and unpleasant tasting.
The oil in lamps and stoves is a very cheap form of heat.
I hope that the waiter on the plane will bring some water soon.
After lightning struck the tree, the forest turned into a burning blaze.
I cleaned the rabbit’s cage and left some dry grass for it to eat.
I threw the ball through the line in the shape of a circle.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
Monkey Island In the middle of the ocean, there is a small island shaped like an arc.
But how did the monkeys get there? Once, an English admiral was exploring Africa when he found hundreds of monkeys.
He thought, “I could sell these monkeys and become very rich! I’m going to take them to England.”
He put stakes in the ground, tied string around them and made loops in the string.
When the monkeys ran through the forest, their feet got caught in the loops, and they couldn’t escape.
Then the admiral put the monkeys in cages on his ship and sailed away.
There was no soft hay for the monkeys to sleep on.
Instead, they slept on branches with sharp thorns that cut into the monkeys’ flesh.
For dinner, he gave them tiny pieces of sour grapefruit to eat.
He was horrified to see the thin monkeys in the cages.
The monkeys ran and played all over the ship! They attacked the admiral and the steward and ate their food.
One monkey ran into a kerosene lamp, and it fell over.
The ship caught fire and began to sink! The whole crew was lost except for the monkeys.
They floated away from the fiery blaze of the ship.
In the morning, they saw a little island in the distance.
The admiral thought that selling the monkeys would make him rich.
The admiral caught the monkeys using loops of string and stakes.
Where did the admiral plan to take the monkeys? a.
What did the monkeys eat while they were in the cages? a.
What shape was the island that the monkeys found? a.
The teacher admonished Mark because he was chewing gum in class.
If something or someone is awesome, they are impressive or frightening.
To beware means to be careful of something or someone that is dangerous.
To brag means to talk of one’s abilities or achievements in a proud way.
He had strong muscles and bragged about it to the entire class.
To disagree with someone means to have a different opinion from them.
The lawyers disagreed about the best way to settle the case.
To echo means that a sound repeats itself because it bounced off an object.
The child yelled over the canyon, and the wall echoed the sound.
If something is eventual, it will happen at the end of a series of events.
The constant training and planning led the team to an eventual victory.
A hint is information that suggests something will happen or is true.
I quietly passed on a hint to my sister about the test.
An idiot is a person who is not smart or who has done something silly.
Because he got lost in the forest, the man felt like an idiot.
An immense amount of money was needed to buy such a large boat.
If something is indirect, then it is not the easiest or straightest way.
He chose to take the most indirect route to the coast.
An option is a choice between two or more things.
The children were given the option of three houses to pick from.
If something is perfect, then it is without any mistakes.
She got all the questions right, so her score was perfect.
Mom switched the TV station from the news to her favorite show.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
My sister likes to___________ about how my mother and father think her behavior is.
The king wanted people to think that his power was__________
He knew his friends were having a surprise party for him.
A proud young man was looking for a new pastime.
He heard about people hiking in the national parks and decided to try it for himself.
As he started his stroll, an old man walked up to him.
But the young man disagreed with the old man and bragged that he had a perfect understanding of the park.
I believe I have a thorough knowledge of these trails.
The old man listened to the young man and then admonished him for his pride.
Whenever he had to choose between an easy or difficult route, he always chose the.
In addition, he was not conscious of which direction he was going.
Because his course through the wilderness was so indirect, he had no idea where he was.
He looked at his map but could not pinpoint his location.
He walked one path after another but soon realized he was lost.
The sun was going down, and sudden strong winds gave a hint that it might rain.
The thought of the eventual storm tormented the young man.
He hurried in one direction, but soon switched out of confusion.
When he arrived home, he knew that he had acted like.
He decided to listen to people with more experience than himself.
The young man decided to hike in the national parks.
The young man believed that his knowledge of the park’s trails was thorough.
When the young man had an option of two trails, he always chose the easier one.
The young man was tormented by the thought of the eventual storm.
When the young man got home, he knew that the old man had acted like an idiot.
What did the young man choose as his new pastime?
Why did the old man admonish the young man? a.
Which of the following gave a hint of an eventual storm? a.
To disapprove of something is to think that it is wrong.
You use except to talk about the only thing that a statement does not apply to.
Everyone had fun on the trip except Jim, who felt ill the whole time.
When something or someone is immoral, they are evil or do bad things.
To moan is to make a low sound when feeling pain or sadness.
If someone is oblivious of something, they are unaware of it.
I was late to school because I was oblivious of the time.
To perish means to die, usually because of bad conditions or bad events.
Michael fell into the pit and needed some help to get out.
The rim is the outside edge of a round thing, like a cup or bottle.
I put my lips to the rim of the bottle and took a drink.
As the sun rose, two eagles soared through the sky.
If something is trivial, it is not important or meaningful.
Television is trivial, but learning to read is very important.
If something is typical, it is normal for a certain type of thing.
If something is utterly a way, it is completely that way.
When the sun was blocked by the moon, it was utterly dark outside.
My sister told me the dramatic movie would make me weep.
Which word would best describe a smooth, wet stone? a.
Which word describes something that would have a rim? a.
Which of these people would most likely be moaning? a.
Which person has been proven to have committed an immoral act? a.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
He grabbed the can by its__________ , then tossed it far down into the.
Every time the sick woman would___________ in pain, her daughter would.
Because it__________ covered the fence, the gardener had to remove all of the.
The Tricky Fox There was a fox that lived in the forest.
One day, he used the sharp rim of a bottle to dig a pit in the ground.
He hid in a tree until Rabbit came to the pit’s edge.
Then, he jumped out and pushed Rabbit into the pit.
The angry Rabbit climbed out and told the other animals what happened.
We all disapprove of his actions, so we should teach him a lesson.
The next day, all of the animals hid near the pit and waited for Fox.
He walked up to the pit to see if Rabbit was still trapped.
Just then, the other animals ran up to Fox and pushed him in.
All the animals laughed and cheered, except Fox, of course.
Fox couldn’t get out! The walls of the pit were covered in damp ivy.
At last, he saw Eagle watching him from her roost.
He yelled, “Eagle, please help me! If I don’t get out of here, I will perish!”
Fox said, “I promise!” Eagle began her flight to the bottom of the pit.
Fox used the rim of a bottle to dig a deep pit.
The damp ivy was too slippery for Fox to climb out.
What happened after Eagle’s flight to the bottom of the pit? a.
If you do something awhile, you do it for a short time.
Cyberspace is the imaginary place of the Internet where activities occur.
To edit means to correct a piece of writing so that it is suitable to be published.
She asked her brother to edit her paper before she submitted it to her teacher.
An essay is a short piece of writing on a certain subject.
She had to write a two-page essay for her English class.
Carol fainted because she hadn’t eaten in over a day.
If something is global, it happens all around the world.
A gymnasium is a building with equipment that you can use to get exercise.
When I go to the gymnasium, I use the treadmill for 20 minutes.
To highlight something means to mark it with a color so that it is easy to see -* I read my vocabulary list and highlighted the most difficult words.
If someone is ignorant about something, they have no knowledge about it.
A moral is a message at the end of a story that teaches you something.
At the end of the story, Mother explained the moral to the children.
At New Year, I made a list of resolutions to help me have a better year.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
If you know how to__________ a computer, you can get access to.
You should look in the to see if this book will help you with the report.
Jennifer’s notes are very neat! They are _ most important parts with a green pen.
In the first aid class, we learned what to do.
The Magic Computer I had a difficult geography project to finish by the end of the semester.
But when I got there, all the computers were turned off.
Apparently there was a recent problem, and technicians were fixing it.
They were small and dark, and the computers were very old, but I had no choice.
I typed and highlighted the assignment’s title: “Evaluate the Government’s Response to Global Warming.” But I didn’t know what to write in my essay.
Finally I decided to find a book to help me.
I went to the library, checked the book indexes and eventually found a useful book.
When I looked at the screen, I saw something so weird that I nearly fainted! The essay was complete! Had somebody in cyberspace written it? I didn’t know, but I was very happy.
After that, I used the computer for all my assignments.
I’d type the title, wait awhile, and the computer would do it.
Every assignment was perfect; I never had to edit anything.
I stopped paying attention to my teacher’s lectures and spent my extra time in the gymnasium.
A month later, I was walking into class when my friend said, “Are you prepared for the test?”
After that, I made a resolution never to use the magic computer again.
The moral of this story is that if you cheat at.
The computers were turned off because there was a recent problem.
The computers in the private study rooms weren’t operating correctly.
In his project, the student had to evaluate the government’s response to global warming.
The geography test was worth fifty percent of the final grade.
The student failed the test because he was completely ignorant about the subject.
What did the student NOT have to do in a.
Alas is a word that people say when something bad happens.
I looked everywhere for my purse, but alas, I couldn’t find it.
A cape is a large cloth that covers one’s back and is tied around the neck.
When something happens evenly, it happens at the same rate or level.
The food was handed out evenly among the hungry people.
A patch is a part of a surface that is different in appearance from the rest.
There was one small patch of grass in the sand-covered desert.
The student smiled with pleasure when she received the prize.
I heard a loud pop; then my computer screen shattered.
A role is the normal purpose or function of a person or thing.
My role at work is to check the quality of the products.
If you stick to a healthy diet, your stomach will shrink!
You need to soak these beans overnight before you cook them.
As he welded the two pieces of metal together, sparks flew everywhere.
A spirit is someone’s feelings and personality, but not a physical body part.
I wore my new suit on my date with Melissa.
P/ABU A Choose the right word for the given definition.
SQQ'O' B Choose the right definition for the given word.
Jack Frost and the Pudding Every winter, a magical boy with a wild spirit named Jack Frost arrives in.
He wears a white cape, and his role is to cover everything with frost and ice.
But Jack Frost also gets pleasure from playing tricks on common folks.
One dark winter evening, he was sitting on the rail of a fence near a river, pointing at some trees.
When he did so, there was a pop, and the trees were evenly covered in frost.
He was carrying a basket of ingredients for his wife’s cake recipe.
He pointed, and suddenly there was a patch of ice on the path.
The bags of flour, fruit and sugar fell open and got wet.
A couple of eggs broke, and a stick of butter shrank in the water.
Tom gathered the ingredients and climbed out of the river.
Jack Frost laughed at poor Tom because his nice suit got soaked as well.
What was left of the food caught fire! Jack Frost ran off laughing.
He could only envision how angry his wife would be.
He wished he had been more attentive and noticed that Jack was around.
The butter was melting and the eggs were starting to cook! Even the fruit began to simmer.
It was delicious! He happily took it home for dessert.
Tom’s life difficult, Jack had actually made Tom a wonderful pudding!
Jack Frost was sitting on the rail of a fence.
Tom said “Alas!” because he knew he wouldn’t have any cake.
When Jack Frost set fire to the food, the eggs started to melt.
Which of the following was NOT an ingredient of the wonderful pudding?
The plans for building the new home were drawn by a famous architect.
You should conceal your money so no one can take it from you.
A crime is something bad that a person does that can be punished by law.
A deed is a certificate that proves that someone owns something.
When she bought the car, she was given a deed to show the car was hers.
A landmark is an object that helps people find or remember a location.
The tall tree was used as a landmark for people to find the road to the inn.
If something is legal, it is related to the law or allowed by the law.
It was not legal for him to drive until he was eighteen years old.
To oblige someone means to require them to do something.
If I wanted to have playtime, I was obliged to clean my room once a week.
An offense is an action that breaks the law and requires punishment.
He was put in jail for two days for the offense.
She resolved the problem with her children by giving them both a toy.
A sentence is punishment given to someone who didn’t follow the law.
The sentence for stealing a car is much worse than for stealing candy.
P/MlST A Choose the right word for the given definition.
What is someone who feels gratitude most likely to say?
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The government has enough money and materials to help all its people.
The town had a large public meeting to discuss the problem with the sidewalks.
The necklace was remembered fora special reason because it was from her grandmother.
His act that broke the law was serious enough to require him to stay in jail for 60 days.
She had iust enough money in her arrangement with the bank.
Children are required to go to school in most countries.
My uncle said in public that he was an old friend of the mayor.
Four students offered to help to carry the table downstairs.
A bear’s natural home is usually large forests areas with mountains.
He was filled with a feeling of being thankful when he was given the dog.
The Architect’s Plan An architect wanted to build a new office building.
He planned to cut down the trees to make room for the building.
The land was actually the habitat of several types of birds.
First, they held a rally and told others about the issue.
Then, they decided to take legal action because the architect didn’t respect the animals’ rights.
To resolve the problem, they asked a judge to intervene.
The judge could not call any witnesses for the nature lovers, so he first asked the architect to tell his side of the story.
The other half will remain free, so the birds have a place to live.
I will volunteer my time and efforts to design a new type of building.
It will provide bushes on the roof where birds can live.
He built this new type of building, which was loved by everyone.
The land was the habitat of several types of birds.
The architect could not conceal his gratitude, so he cheered.
There were enough resources in the company’s bank account to build a new building.
Which of the following about the land did the architect NOT tell the judge? a.
What did the group do in order to resolve the problem with the architect? a.
What did the judge decide to give the architect as a sentencing? a.
The manager was the only person with access to the password.
I was scared, so I gripped my older sister’s hand.
To influence someone or something is to have an effect over them.
A law is a rule made by the legislative body.
The students learned about different laws during social studies class.
A mode is a setting or condition on a machine.
Mother turned the 7V to quiet mode while she talked on the phone.
I usually perspire a lot when I am at practice.
To tend to do something is to be likely to do it or to do it often.
My mom tends to buy me the perfect gift each Christmas.
When something is valid, it is correct or based on good reasoning.
The expert’s opinion on the subject was more valid than others.
A version is an account of something that differs slightly from the original.
She read the students British version of the Chinese fairy tale.
You use whatsoever after a noun to emphasize that there is nothing of that thing.
The boy had no idea whatsoever how to solve the story problem.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
Decisions made in courts are often__________ by the personal views of the judge.
My father___________ a check in the letter he sent me.
He always offered to help even if I didn’t ask for any help__________
Sheila took the___________from her purse and pressed a couple of buttons.
It took her awhile to figure out how to turn it to silent__________
She couldn’t have __________ to the room without a key.
The student had a ___________ reason for leaving the classroom when his teacher was gone.
He tried to explain his___________of what happened while she was gone.
Janie and the Music Player Janie had constant thoughts about getting a music player.
She hurried down the hall but halted when she saw a backpack on the floor.
She reached inside the bag and felt a small object at the bottom.
It was a music player enclosed in a black case! Janie tended to be honest, and she had no valid reason to take the device.
When she arrived at class, she gave her teacher the bag.
Johnson asked, “Does this backpack belong to anyone?” A girl named Linda claimed the bag.
She turned it to the “on” mode, but it wouldn’t work.
We bought you a music player, but we’re giving it to Linda.
A Mark each statement T for true or F for false.
Janie halted while she walked to class because she found a backpack.
When Linda put the player to “on” mode, it started to work.
Janie’s parents gave the music player to Linda to replace the one she broke.
The reading explains that Janie lied to her teacher about what? a.
Janie’s parents said she had no respect whatsoever for what? a.
If something is alongside another thing, then it is next to it.
The breeze caused the leaves to fall off the tree.
To defy someone is to work against them or refuse to do what they say.
The students got into trouble for defying their teacher’s rules.
To display something is to show it, especially by putting it in a certain place.
The boy was too feeble to carry the object very far.
To forgive someone is to stop being angry with them.
If someone is lively, they have a lot of energy.
My father was outraged when he saw that I had crashed his car.
A rumor is something people talk about even though it may not be true.
To smash something is to break it into many small pieces.
A wage is the money that a person gets for doing a job.
The wages I receive from my job are really great!
You use whereas to show how two things are different.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
I needed Jamie to help me in fixing my car.
The story that may not be true about his life is spreading around town.
I spend all my money that I make at my job on new clothes.
The chair broke into small pieces when Rob sat down on it.
Bob is small and weak because he doesn’t eat healthy food.
I stopped being angry at loseph when he said he was sorry.
Which of the following connects two negative ideas? j a.
Growing to be Great When George was just a boy, he didn’t have any parents.
Many bad things could have happened to George, but he was lucky.
He was sent to live alongside other children without parents.
There were kind people to assist George and help him go forward with his life.
He defied anyone who tried to help him, and soon it was difficult for them to forgive him.
Whereas he was lazy in school and liked neither the subjects nor the teachers, he was lively and happy when he played baseball.
The teacher thought that George looked majestic when he played.
When George hit the ball, it flew through the breeze as if it would never come down.
Soon the other boys and even the teachers looked small and feeble next to him.
Everyone thought that this heralded the start of a great baseball career.
When George got his first job as a baseball player, he gave most of his wages to the people who had helped him as a boy.
He hoped that other children would also find a way to live happy, successful lives.
George grew up alongside other children who didn’t have parents.
When George grew up, he gave some of his wages to the people who had assisted him.
George smashed things and slapped other boys when he was outraged.
Why did one of George’s teachers begin to work with him?
To classify things is to put them into groups based on their type.
The biologist classified the plant as a completely new species.
To concede is to admit that something is true against your wish.
The student conceded that he had cheated on the test.
I learned some concepts of molecules before working in the science lab.
She celebrated her three decades of work with the company.
A diagram is a simple drawing that explains what something is or how it works.
By following the diagram, I was able to put the desk together.
A ferry is a boat that carries passengers over short distances.
To isolate is to separate one person or thing from a group.
The teacher isolated the bad child from the class before talking with her.
Since he skipped breakfast, he had a longing for food all morning.
The bottles of wine were covered in a layer of dust particles.
A plea is a request that is urgent or emotional.
If someone is sophisticated, they know many things about the world.
Jake is one of the most sophisticated persons I’ve ever met.
Meerkats can’t walk like humans, but they can stand upright.
On his visit to Canada, he realized studying English was worthwhile.
PABTf A Choose the right word for the given definition.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
After sitting in the cell for just one hour, the prisoner felt a __________ to be free.
He made a ___________to the officers to release him immediately.
Learning how to speak another language is a ___________ skill to have in the world of international business.
William used a piece of white paperto__________ the different plants in the garden.
That made it easier for him to draw a __________ of the leaves of each type of plant.
As he drove his car onto the__________ , John felt sad.
He wanted to travel by airplane, but after looking at ticket prices, he had to___________that air travel was just too expensive.
In maintaining good health, it is important to__________ from eating unhealthy foods.
But that doesn’t mean you must__________ all of the foods that you enjoy.
Soon, Anton felt a longing to build a more powerful microscope.
He dreamed of using it to make an important scientific discovery.
If he had sold the concept to others, it would have made him very rich.
So he used his secret microscope to study the natural world.
One day he was looking at saliva from his mouth with the microscope.
Some of them were moving! He thought that the particles were tiny organisms.
So he isolated them from each other and studied each.
He was the first person to see these tiny organisms.
So he drew diagrams of the organisms and sent them to a group of scientists in London.
The scientists were sophisticated men who did not believe tiny, animate organisms could live in our mouths.
Anton made a plea for them to come to Holland to see the organisms with their own eyes.
They performed a careful review of his work, and they conceded that he had made a.
Why didn’t Anton sell his concept of a powerful microscope? a.
To send him animate organisms To see the particles with their own eyes.
An alliance is a group of people who work together.
Applause is the noise made when people clap hands to show approval.
Culture is the music, art, and writings of a certain place or group of people.
When a group of things is diverse, it is made up of a wide variety of things.
Big cities have diverse populations with people of different races and ages.
To enchant someone is to make them feel very interested or happy.
An exception is someone or something not conforming to a rule.
Most students thought the test was hard, but Tim was the exception.
A genre is a type of literature, art, or music characterized by its style.
An impact is the effect someone or something has on another.
To sort means to separate things into different groups or classes.
If people are vain, they are only concerned with how they look.
Rebecca is so vain that she looks at herself in every mirror.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Please put into different groups all the leaves you find.
Everybody was very interested when Kate read that beautiful poem out loud.
Tim takes a long time to get ready because he is so concerned with how he looks.
Ocean life is made up of a wide variety of things.
The city’s only action taken to protect itself was to build a giant brick wall around it.
Ben went through many problems before he finished his project.
Most girls like to play with dolls, but Samantha is the one who doesn’t conform.
She was a big part of the new jazz genre and culture and had a diverse group of fans.
So when World War II started, she wanted to help the nation that had given her so much.
When this happened, some French people formed a secret alliance.
It helped the European and American armies fight the Germans.
The first was to carry messages to and from other members.
The messages were written in code on her sheets of music.
It would have been dangerous if the Germans found them.
She enchanted them with her singing and dancing and got lots of applause.
A always equipped with a small notebook at these concerts.
She listened for details about the war and wrote them down.
Baker sorted the details and gave authoritative reports to the Resistance.
The Germans knew who she was, but they didn’t think she was smart enough to work for the Resistance.
This helped the Resistance and the French army save lives and win the war.
When she died, the army had a special ceremony to thank her again for her bravery.
Baker’s first job was to carry messages written in code to and from European politicians.
Baker provided shelter for Resistance members and supplied them with goods.
Baker was always equipped with a small notebook during her concerts.
Baker enchanted politicians and army members with her singing and dancing.
Baker sorted details about the war and gave authoritative reports.
An alternative is something that you can choose instead of your first choice.
Her first plan to make extra money seemed weak, so she chose an alternative.
A bid to do something is an attempt to do it.
He made a bid to become the university’s next president.
To blow means to move air or move something through the air, as in the wind.
A continent is one of the seven large areas of land on the Earth.
Disrespect is rudeness or a behavior that shows a lack of respect.
He showed disrespect by arguing with his boss during a meeting.
To lean is to bend the body in a particular direction.
The woman leaned against the counter because she was tired.
Mischief is behavior that is meant to trick or cause trouble for people.
Ben was up to mischief when he persuaded Ken to paint his face.
Muscle is a mass of tissue attached to bone that helps you move.
She went to the gym in order to make her muscles stronger.
A succession is a number of things that follow one afterthe other.
The student said the letters of the alphabet in succession.
If someone is timid, they are afraid, shy, or nervous.
The timid child hides behind her mother whenever she sees a stranger.
Violence is forceful action that is meant to injure or kill people.
The boy hit his brother in an act of violence.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
It was bad that the man had a lot of__________ because he used it to cause.
The boy had a lot of__________ before his trip to Europe.
I turned on the fan so that it would__________ air on me.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Australia is an island that is also the smallest large area of land on the planet.
The pitcher threw the balls to home plate in a series, one after another.
She had to walk down an extended road to get there.
He needed to bend over and rest on the side of his car.
The student decided that the answer was A and not the other choice.
The river’s fast steady movement of water made it difficult to swim to the other side.
He talked about US history, and the pupils wrote notes in the time during the event.
The loud noise was painful and rough to her ears.
The boys used forceful action to get what they wanted.
Which word best describes a student who is very happy and excited? a.
Which of the following describes a scared person best? a.
What is something that can be soft and round? a.
Which word best describes behavior meant to trick or cause trouble? a.
Which of the following best describes the action of the wind? a.
The Sun and the North Wind The Sun and the North Wind were talking to each other in the sky.
The Sun listened as the North Wind talked with enthusiasm about how powerful he was and how he could push something from one continent to another with one breath.
He said, “I am the strongest thing in the sky.”
He yelled, “You? That’s a joke!” This hurt the Sun.
He was usually timid and did not want to cause conflict.
In the meantime, a man began walking along the avenue down on Earth.
Sun looked down on the terrain below, he saw the man.
He used all of his muscles in his face and belly to blow winds at his target in succession.
The Sun decided to rescue the man from the mischief of the North Wind.
He said, “May I try?” Then he sent down sunlight that made the man warm.
He took off his jacket and enjoyed the nice weather.
You are very powerful,” the Sun said to the North Wind, “but you use violence in your bid to appear strong.
The North Wind thought that he was stronger than everyone else.
The North Wind blew the jacket off of the man.
The Sun was timid and did not teach the North Wind a lesson.
The North Wind used violence in his bid to be powerful.
Why did the North Wind fill his lungs with air? a.
What happened in the meantime while the Sun and the North Wind were talking? a.
A destiny is all the things that happen or will happen to a person in their life.
When someone is irritable, they become annoyed or angry very easily.
To lag behind is to move slowly behind other moving objects.
The girl on rollerblades lagged behind the little girl on the bicycle.
To maximize something means to make it the biggest in size or amount.
The girl was scared to go back to sleep because she had a nightmare.
When something is nutritious, it helps the body stay healthy.
Mangoes are one of the most nutritious fruits in the world.
Protein is a substance that is necessary for the body to grow and be strong.
Stuff is a word used to refer to things without mentioning the things by name.
When something is subconscious, it is done without thinking about it.
Breathing is one of the subconscious things that the body does.
Avan is a vehicle that is used for carrying things but is smaller than a truck.
To warn someone is to make them know of possible danger in the future.
The lifeguard warned people to stay away from the rough ocean.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
He isn’t allowed to watch scary movies because they give him bad dreams.
Push everything to one side to make the most of the space of the gymnasium.
He borrowed a truck-like vehicle to help him move some of his furniture.
Ellen wanted to get to the gym and try a new exercise routine.
Harriet doesn’t like talking to Jesse when he’s easily annoyed.
The cars honked their devices for making noises while they waited in traffic.
If you don’t start trying harder, you will move slowly far behind the rest of us.
What is something you might put your signature on? a.
What are things that happen and will happen in a person’s life? a.
Which of the following is similar to a small truck? a.
What does it mean to have influence over something? a.
The Big Race Alex woke up scared because of a nightmare.
Alex thought that it was a subconscious way that his brain was trying to warn him about something.
He was going to run in a race that day.
Did the dream mean he was going to lose? He became irritable.
So he prepared a meal that contained a lot of protein to maximize his energy for the race.
Then his father asked, “Do you want help packing your stuff?” “No,” replied Alex.
He wanted to make sure that he had all of his equipment for the race.
Alex’s family got in their van and drove to the track.
However, today Alex refused to give the boy his signature.
He took his jump rope from his bag and started his usual workout.
He thought it might be his destiny to become a loser.
While he was thinking, he didn’t hear the horn that meant the race had started.
By the time Alex started, he lagged far behind everyone.
He couldn’t run fast enough to catch up to the others.
He had lost the race! He shouldn’t have let the nightmare affect him.
Alex had a nightmare that he forgot his stuff at home.
The dream made Alex irritable on the day of the race.
Alex wanted to eat something with a lot of sugar for breakfast.
Alex lagged behind while the other runners zoomed past him.
What did Alex’s father offer to help him do? a.
What did the boy at the track ask Alex for? a.
What was Alex so affected by that he lost the race? a.
A brick is a block of hard clay that is used for building things, such as walls.
To crumble means to break or fall apart into small pieces.
The old house’s walls crumbled into a pile of rock and wood.
A fist is a hand with fingers bent in toward the palm.
The bully made a fist and threatened to hit the small boy.
If something is flexible, then it can bend easily without breaking.
The tree branch was so flexible it could be bent into a circle and not break.
To flush means the face becomes red due to heat, illness, or emotion.
To injure someone means to damage a part of their body.
A mixture is something that is made by mixing other things together.
The walls were built using a mixture of water, rock, and dirt.
After arguing, the two friends were reconciled with each other.
To ruin something means to harm or damage it greatly.
Our walk in the park was ruined by the sudden rain.
Shutters are wooden or metal covers in front of a window.
Smith closed the shutters every night to make his bedroom dark.
If food is stale, then it is not fresh but dry, hard, and not good to eat.
The cookies sat on the table so long that they became stale.
Which of the following says that two former enemies become friends again? a.
How would you describe a girl who can stretch her leg behind her head? a.
Which of these would you use to make bread? a.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
But when he was finished, he made a perfectly square__________
In the middle of the night, she got out of bed and opened the__________
She gazed at the sky where the stars__________ like tiny fires.
The rice was not eaten soon enough, so it tasted__________
The cook picked up the block of cheese and___________ it into little pieces.
Then he mixed them with the__________ before placing it in the oven.
When he started to___________the flour into the bowl, he slipped and dropped it.
Even though it was greatly damaged, none of the passengers were__________
The Brothers and the Bread Two brothers wanted to go outside and play.
The brothers hurried to prepare the bread, but not carefully.
They were careless and sprinkled too much salt into the mixture.
The dough needed to be soft and flexible, but the salt made it into a lump that was as hard as a brick.
The dough then crashed into the kitchen window’s shutters and crumbled.
Luckily, the brothers were not injured, but they did make a huge mess.
The brothers cleaned the floor and expressed their sorrow to their mother.
But there was no bread, and it was too late to play.
They realized that trying to do something quickly often makes more work.
Because the bread was stale, the mother wanted them to bake fresh bread.
The dough became a lump that was as hard as a brick.
The brothers had to clean the kitchen, so it may sparkle.
What happened when the older brother hit the dough with his fist? a.
You use although to say that one thing is contrasted by another.
Although she was late, her friends gave her a warm welcome.
She always applies makeup to her face before going outside.
To bury someone or something means to put them in the ground.
They buried their grandfather under his favorite tree after he died.
When you complain, you say that you are unhappy about something.
To confuse someone means to make them feel like they are unsure.
The sign confused the traveler because it pointed in two directions.
When you talk about an entire thing, you are talking about the whole thing.
He was so hungry that he ate the entire pizza by himself.
He wanted to establish a club for people to help the Earth.
A leash is a rope or chain that is used to lead an animal.
A lot of dogs must wear a leash to keep them from running away.
She was in the midst of cleaning when the telephone rang.
There was a lot of misery after Sam lost his dog.
Research is close and careful study to discover new things.
Scientists did a lot of research on the subject of blood type.
Choose the word that is a better fit for each blank.
After weeks of hard work, the scientists must___________the results of their.
Laika, the Space Dog One of the world’s most beloved space travelers was also the.
Laika was a little dog living on the streets of Moscow, Russia.
She matured on the streets because no one would give her a home.
She had to learn how to live without eating much.
She found ways to keep warm in a very cold climate.
Scientists thought a tough dog like Laika would do well in a project they were putting together.
In a prior launch, Russia had put the first man-made object into space.
Although many facts about space had been learned, they weren’t enough to help send humans to space safely.
Laika and two other dogs were chosen to help scientists with their research.
In the end, though, only Laika would go to space.
Scientists carefully applied wires to Laika’s skin to measure her body’s reactions once she got into space.
But in the midst of so much excitement, something very sad happened.
Scientists were able to tell that Laika was under a lot of stress.
Laika’s entire ship had become as hot as a furnace.
Scientists were powerless to help the dog in her misery.
Some have complained that the little dog should never have been used in the mission.
Laika was never buried, but a memorial has been established in Moscow.
It seems that Laika became a hero to many people.
Scientists did a variety of tests for research before the Sputnik 2 was due to leave.
Wires were applied to Laika’s leash so that scientists could find the ship.
Although Laika could not be buried, a spaceship was established in her honor.
In the midst of the scientists’ excitement, Laika’s ship became too hot.
In a prior launch, scientists sent two other dogs into space.
Many people complained that Laika should not have gone to space.
The victims of the flood were bound by their need to help each other.
A bruise is a dark mark caused by being hit by something.
She got a bruise on her knee from falling down.
A custom is a way of doing things that has been the same for a long time.
It is a custom that the bride and groom have the first dance.
She glimpsed outside the window as the plane was about to land.
A hoop is a ring that is made of plastic, metal, or wood.
The boys tried to toss the ball through the basketball hoop.
Per is used to mean “each” when giving a price, size, or amount.
It costs $8 per person to watch the baseball game.
To plead is to ask for something you want very badly.
He pleaded for his parents to let him go to the soccer game.
A source of something is the place that it comes from.
The river was the source of drinking water for the village.
Gina was vehement when she found out that Liz was bad in school.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
Greg had the___________ of falling in a pool, though he didn’t know how to swim.
After one day, the___________on her lip began to go away.
For the__________ of fairness, we tried to divide the pizza equally.
They walked past a large river, which the guide said was the___________of a waterfall.
For example, on Saturdays, it was their_________ to go to the park together.
She took the note from the students and__________ it into pieces.
The boy lost his balance and fell with a __________
When he got up, he noticed that he’d ___________ his elbow.
Gwen’s New Friends Gwen walked into the gym for her next class.
The custom is to let you choose your own teams.
With a stern voice, the coach said, “No.” Gwen was vehement.
I don’t know any of these girls! Let me play on another team.
I don’t want to hear any more negative comments from.
For the sake of the team, please try your best.
When the game started, Gwen played as best as she could.
The ball sailed through the air and went right through the hoop!
She had scraped her knee and had a small bruise.
By the end of the game, Gwen forgot altogether that she hadn’t wanted to play, and her team won! The victory bound Gwen’s team together.
She had made a lot of new friends, and they were a source of happiness for her for many years.
The custom was to allow the girls to choose their own teams.
Gwen told her teammates that she could stitch her pants later.
Gwen pleaded to be on another team that had some of her friends.
Stephanie asked Gwen to lose on purpose for the sake of the team.
Gwen ripped her jeans, scraped her knee, and got a bruise when she fell.
How were the girls on Gwen’s team bound together? a.
A civilization is an organized group of humans that have culture and government -* Most early civilizations in Central America didn’t use metal weapons.
When something is convenient, it is easy to do and does not take a lot of work.
The bus is a convenient way to get to school.
A den is a living space for some types of animals, such as lions.
Dew is the drops of water that form on the ground outside during the night.
When we woke up, we saw that the grass was covered in dew.
She made a drastic decision to get her long hair cut short.
A flock is a group of animals, such as birds, sheep or goats.
A lid is a top for a box or container that can be removed.
He lifted the lid of the box and revealed her present.
To loom is to seem very large and often scary.
When something is native, it is originating in a certain place or area.
Reeds are tall and skinny plants that grow in groups near water.
The sun set behind the reeds of the lake’s shore.
When something is urban, it is related to the city.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
The box had a ___________that was very easy to open.
It was a ___________place to store the young girl’s toys.
When it started raining, I ___________ my newspaper in half.
Then I carried it over my head to___________ myself from the rain.
After only a few days, she was glad to___________the city.
When he returned to __________ , he was stronger than ever.
At that point, they couldn’t go any further because the___________grew too thickly.
The__________ of geese chose not to land in the field because it was still wet with.
The cooking process results in a ___________change to the plant’s chemical makeup.
There was little light inside the__________ where the bears lived.
Outside, there was little plant life, just a few__________ and some small weeds.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The man asked for extra fungus with a round top for his sauce.
My socks got wet when I walked in the drops of water that formed outside.
Madagascar has an interesting group of original animals and plants.
The boy put on a scarf to protect his neck from the cold wind.
Alyssa found a small living place where she thought a rabbit lived.
The man bent the letter and put it into an envelope.
The farmer traded his group of animals of goats for a new horse.
I was not strong enough to lift the top part of the container.
After the movie was over, the audience left through the back door.
Something that is easy to do is described as what? a.
Kara Goes Camping “Kara, would you like to go camping with my family?” asked Tracy.
After they set up the camp, they went for a walk.
Do you see that bunch of mushrooms next to it.
As the day went on, mighty clouds soon loomed in the distance.
They used an umbrella to shield them from the rain.
Back at the camp, they ate cold sandwiches for dinner and went to sleep.
It was a drastic change from the previous day’s weather.
They folded their sleeping bags and put them in a box.
Tracy closed the lid and told Kara, “Today will be fun, I promise!” Kara didn’t believe her.
The grass was covered with dew, and it gleamed in the sunlight.
The reeds swayed in the wind, and a flock of birds flew above.
Camping was a good way for friends to spend time together, she realized.
The next day, it was time for them to leave.
She didn’t like camping at first, but she learned how fun it could be over the weekend.
Tracy invites Kara to visit a new civilization with her family.
The group returns to camp because mighty clouds were looming.
They used an umbrella to shield themselves from the rain.
The weather was stormy on the second day of camping.
Kara has a drastic change in opinion about camping at the end of the story.
Which of the following does Kara NOT see during the trip?
How does Kara feel as she exits the park? a.
An accent is a certain way of speaking that shows where a person is from.
A barber is a person whose job is to cut hair.
A basement of a house or building is a room that is built underground.
When something is blank, it does not have anything on it.
To complicate something means to make it harder than necessary.
To decline an offer or invitation means to say no to it.
An errand is a trip taken to do a specific activity.
He couldn’t go to practice because he had several errands to do.
A glove is a piece of clothing that covers your fingers and hand.
When it gets cold, I always put on a pair of gloves.
A script is the words of a film or play.
To search for something or someone means to look for them carefully.
She slammed the book shut after she finished reading it.
Dean and Anne finished the race at the same time,_____
Next week he was going to audition for the school play.
Do you want to practice with me? The basement at my.
On the day of auditions, Peter wore his lucky leather jacket.
The teacher told him to begin, but his mind was blank.
A week later, the teacher put a list of the parts on the wall.
He didn’t get the lead part—Robby did! Peter pondered the situation and came to the idea that Robby justly received the part.
Robby wanted the part of the hermit because he would get to talk with an accent.
The scene on the staircase was about the migrant searching for a new job.
What was Peter’s first excuse for not practicing with Robby? a.
What kind of play were the boys auditioning for? a.
An aisle is a space between two things that people use to walk.
They were told to clear the aisle because the plane was about to land.
The atmosphere is the air around the Earth where weather conditions form.
An author is a person who wrote a certain piece of writing.
The author was hard at work on his next novel.
Her car had a breakdown, and she wasn’t sure howto fix it.
Cargo is the items carried by a ship or airplane.
The cargo of the ship got wet when it started raining.
A chapter is a part of a book that usually has a number or a title.
The first chapter of a book usually introduces the main character of a story.
She was going to bring treats to the party: cookies, muffins, cake, etc.
To flip means to press a switch quickly to turn it on or off.
To notify someone of something is to tell them about it.
The teacher notified us about a change to our assignment.
Peas are a vegetable that is small, round and green.
Even by the afternoon, the day had retained the morning’s freshness.
It was unfortunate that Dave’s team lost, but he still had fun.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Scientists do not completely understand the air that surrounds the Earth.
The police officer said in a definite wav that he arrived at exactly 1:15 PM.
The teacher asked the students to read three divisions in a book.
Carolyn told me that she would be late to the meeting.
His mother brought his food to him on a flat serving plate.
Gina was affected with guilt because her brother got hurt while she watched him.
Islands like Bali, Hawaii, Brunei, and the others similar, rely on tourism.
The flight attendant asked me to keep my bag out of the space between the seats.
The computer’s failure to work caused major problems at work.
The person who wrote the book was nice enough to sign my copy of his book.
He was scared that his plane would have a breakdown.
He walked down the aisle until he found his seat.
He sat down and connected the ends of his seat belt.
After being idle for a few minutes, the pilot announced that they were ready to leave.
He looked out the window at the vivid colors of the sky.
I’m still a bit nervous,” Issac said, “and I’m getting hungry.” “The food service will begin soon.
Just lower the tray on the seat in front of you, and.
Then the pilot notified the passengers of bad conditions in the atmosphere.
He couldn’t believe that he was in such an unfortunate place.
Isaac was still scared, but he tried to retain a good attitude.
The first time I flew, the plane shook so bad that cargo started falling.
My parents told me to listen to music and read a chapter in my book.
He put on headphones and took out a book by his favorite author.
After a while, he didn’t even notice the bad weather.
The bad situation didn’t feel so bad after someone helped him.
Isaac ate raisins and peas and read a book by his favorite author.
Rachel’s parents suggested she read a chapter in her book when she was scared.
Isaac’s fear went away as soon as he took a nap.
The pilot stated that the conditions in the atmosphere were sun, wind, etc.
Isaac was scared, but he tried to retain a good attitude.
What did Isaac think when the plane first started shaking? a.
What happened the first time Rachel was on a plane? a.
To betray someone means to treat them in a dishonest way.
The man betrayed his country when he gave away national secrets.
A blast is a loud noise made by something that explodes.
There was a loud blast when the police officer fired the gun.
A bracelet is a piece of jewelry that you wear around your wrist.
My father gave me a pretty gold bracelet for my birthday.
After about an hour, the rain ceased, and a rainbow appeared.
When an event is civil, it happens inside a country.
The country was torn apart by a terrible civil war.
To comment means to say something that shows your personal opinion.
To distrust someone means to believe that they are not honest.
Lining is a piece of cloth that covers the inside of clothes.
This jacket is very warm because it has a thick lining.
A mass is a large number of things of one type.
When something is the sole thing, it is the only thing of a particular type.
If you sweep the floor, you clean it with a tool like a broom or a brush.
Treachery is a behavior in which a person betrays a country or a person.
The man ran away to escape from the treachery of his wife.
To tuck something means to put it somewhere so that it is neat or safe.
He looked sloppy without his shirt being tucked into his pants.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The lucky man was the only winner of the grand prize.
She was so worried about her mother’s health that she went to church to talk to God.
He coughed and had difficulty breathing after eating a large piece of food.
The rain stopped in the early morning after pouring all night long.
There is a large number of people in the park today.
I hit the wall with my car, and now there is a small amount of damage in it.
I don’t believe the honesty of people who always try to borrow money.
The conditions in some parts of Africa are very poor, and disease is very common.
The man behaved in an untrustworthy wav toward his friends.
I’m going to go to the other side of the road to meet my friend.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
The Betrayal A king lived in a fort with his daughter, Clara.
Because there was so much civil unrest, the king told Clara not to trust anyone.
One day, Clara was walking outside when she saw a girl sweeping the path.
Clara felt sorry for Susie because she was very poor, and Clara gave her a bracelet.
But she heard something ticking, and then a loud blast.
She ran into the hall, and it was full of smoke, which made her choke.
Clara realized that Susie had betrayed her and given the map to her father’s enemies.
Clara prayed that everyone in the castle would be safe from her friend’s treachery.
Clara found her father in the hall with his soldiers.
They had defeated their enemies, but there were dents in their armor from the heavy fighting.
Clara told her father what she had done and promised never to disobey him again.
When Clara and Susie met, Clara was sweeping the path.
Clara commented to her father that he should distrust people.
Which of the following actions did Clara do in the story?
What did Clara hear in the middle of the night? a.
The new teacher had a background in science and math.
Bait is something used to trick a person or thing to do something.
The best bait for catching fish is a big, fat worm.
To chronicle something means to record an event or speech.
Copper is a red-brown metal often used in electric wire and pipes.
He had a disease that caused him to lose his hearing.
Folklore is the collection of beliefs and stories of a culture.
India’s folklore has stories written in long poems about great warriors.
To itch means to rub the skin with your fingernails.
The rough fabric in his shirt made the back of his neck itch.
Stonehenge is believed to have been built about 5 millenniums ago.
To promote someone means to raise them to a higher position or rank.
After two years in the company, she was promoted to a manager.
To relate to something means to have a connection with it.
A company’s plan usually relates to how much profit it can make.
A religion is a belief in a god or gods.
He calculated the numbers to see what the sum of his bills would be.
A teller is a person who works with a bank’s customers.
The teller at the bank helped Kelly put money into a savings account.
Mary is one of the most trustworthy people I’ve ever met.
A vein is a tube in the body that carries blood toward the heart.
The blue veins in my hand are just under my skin.
Venom is a poisonous substance that comes from animals or plants.
A snake’s venom can be used to cure the illnesses it creates.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The reward for finding the lost dog was a very large specific amount.
When his arm got crushed, it damaged a tube that carries blood to the heart was damaged.
To which chart does this collection of data have a connetion with?
This book records the first years of the king’s life.
Since that pot is made out of a red-brown metal, it gets hot very quickly.
The nation had a party because their country had existed for a thousand years.
Her experience made her the best person for the new job.
The poisonous substance from that fish will make you very sick.
The owners of the hotel decided to modernize the computer system.
What do you need if you want to catch a fish?
Which of the following means to be raised to a higher position?
Which of the following best describes the combination of two numbers?
The total sum for staying three nights at the hotel _
The Teller and the Thieves A teller at a bank suspected some of her fellow employees of not being very trustworthy.
In order to catch them, though, she needed some way to link them to the crime.
She remembered that one religion’s literature had a myth that chronicled how a group of thieves was captured.
In the millennium-old story, coins of copper were covered with venom taken from a poisonous snake.
When they touched the coins, the venom infected their bodies through their skin.
The venom ran through their veins, and they all became very sick as if they had a disease.
She knew she couldn’t use venom because it might hurt someone.
However, she thought of a way to update the old story.
She decided to cover a sum of money with a special powder.
If people touched the money, the powder would cause their skin to itch.
She placed the stack of money in the bank’s safe.
No one was supposed to take money from the safe.
Within a few hours, three of her coworkers were scratching their hands and arms.
She told her boss what she had done, and he had the thieves arrested.
Because events from history often repeat, ancient literature had helped.
A teller at a bank thought her fellow employees were trustworthy.
The teller remembered a myth that chronicled how to capture the thieves.
The robbers became sick as if they had a disease.
Two of her coworkers were scratching their hands and arms.
In the millennium-old story, the police linked the robbers to the crime because a.
What did the teller use as bait to catch her fellow employees? a.
Why did the teller decide not to use venom in her trap? a.
Charity is an act of giving help, usually money, to those who need it.
Thanks to his friends’ charity, he had enough money to pay the rent.
To condemn someone means to give them a specific punishment.
The judge condemned the criminal to five years in prison.
If something is cozy, then it is comfortable, warm, and relaxing.
To deplete an amount of something means to use up all of it.
All the driving he was doing was depleting his car’s fuel supply.
An economy is the money and businesses of a country or region.
The factory was good for the economy because it brought jobs to the area.
Shoes, hats, dresses and purses were the goods she wanted to buy.
You should heed the advice on the sign and not drive so fast.
An empire is a large group of countries ruled by an emperor or empress.
The emperor built roads to make travel easier throughout the empire.
To mock someone means to tease them in a cruel way.
The girls mocked Nancy because she was a new student.
If someone is neutral, then they do not help either of the two fighting sides.
The girl’s friend remained neutral while the couple was arguing.
Dan felt persecuted because he was smaller than the other boys at school.
Pity is the feeling of sadness and kindness for those who are suffering.
Because she had pity for the lost boy, she helped him find his parents.
A temper is someone’s mood or a chance that they might get angry.
Unity is the state of people working together for a certain purpose.
The project was finished early, thanks to the unity of the workers.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
The young man___________ in the cold without getting a ride for such a long time.
When a car finally picked him up, the soft seat and warm air was very__________
The king’s two sons had to fight to see who would become the next king.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Appliances are things that are bought that usually last for many years.
After making five cakes, all the sugar in the house was used up.
During the holidays, offering financial help to others is very common.
Because my views were different, I was treated badly by my classmates.
The group that wins this game will have to play the very best team.
When his car ran out of gas, he traveled by asking for rides to the gas station.
Though it might seem like fun at the time, it’s not nice to tease in a cruel wav people.
The warm weather lessened the snow that covered the ground.
The state of working together the groups showed helped them to solve their problems.
The many countries ruled by one person was beginning to slowly fall apart.
Who is someone who would NOT sit on a throne?
If someone can’t control their temper, then they are likely to easily become_
Which of the following is something a scribe would use?
The Scribe’s Warning A great and powerful empire needed the wood from its western areas to build palaces.
With no trees to sell, the commerce in that area was reduced.
Citizens could no longer purchase the goods that they needed to survive.
He hitchhiked to the capital to ask the emperor for charity.
Tables were loaded with food, and fires burned warmly in every fireplace.
The emperor sat up upon his throne, and the scribe stood in front of him.
If we don’t receive help, I’m afraid that the entire empire will suffer.
Upon hearing the scribe’s request, the emperor’s bad temper surfaced.
You should just be happy to belong to this great empire.
The emperor felt no pity for the citizens of the western area.
Not long after, an enemy invaded the empire from the west.
Because the citizens felt persecuted by the emperor, they remained neutral.
They didn’t fight the invaders but allowed them to march freely to the capital.
If he had heeded the words of the scribe, then the citizens might have been the victors.
But because he had treated them badly, they treated him badly in return.
Much of the forest had been depleted by the empire.
The scribe hitchhiked to the capital to ask the emperor for charity.
The scribe sat upon his throne, and the emperor stood in front of him.
The emperor condemned the citizens of the western areas to hard work.
If the emperor had heeded the scribe’s warning, the citizens might have been the victors.
When the emperor heard the scribe’s request, how did he behave? a.
At the end of the story, what happened to the emperor? a.
A controversy is a dispute about something that affects many people.
There has been a lot of controversy over the judge’s decision.
A factor is something that has an effect on the way another thing happens.
A genome is the collection of all the genes in a living thing.
To be identical is to be the same as someone or something else.
We’ve always considered my Uncle Max the intellectual of the family.
A majority of something is almost all of the people orthings in that group.
A majority of the people voted for Tom Smith in the election.
A mammal is an animal that usually has hair and is not born from an egg.
Even though it lives in the water, whales are actually mammals.
Offspring are the children of a person or the babies of an animal.
The dog’s offspring had the same color of fur as she did.
The farmer sprayed his crops with a pesticide to keep bugs away.
If every member of a family has a disease, the disease is.
What would a farmer do if bugs were eating his plants? a.
Which word is related to the term “outer space”? a.
EtM S  A Match the phrases to make complete sentences.
I thought it would take weeks for them to grow,_____
However, recently, there has been some controversy over this theory.
They think that a tiny insect may have been the biggest factor in the death of these huge creatures.
At that time, insects, including the mosquito, were beginning to evolve.
Today, we can regulate the number of mosquitoes with pesticides.
Since there were so many mosquitoes, it was easy for them to bite many of the dinosaurs.
When they bit another living thing, the mosquitoes passed along a deadly disease.
A vast majority of them, from the vegetarians to the meat eaters, died.
To reinforce this idea, scientists stress how gradually the dinosaurs died.
In addition, scientists have found genetic material of mosquitoes in fossils.
Although there may have been other factors, the dinosaurs died mainly because of disease, the scientists say.
Scientists have analyzed the genomes of birds, and they discovered.
A huge creature may have been the biggest factor in the death of these tiny insects.
Today, we can regulate the number of mosquitoes with pesticides.
A vast majority of mosquitoes, from the vegetarians to the meat eaters, died.
In addition, scientists have found the genetic material of mammals in fossils.
What might have been the biggest factor in the dinosaurs’ death?
What do we do to regulate the number of mosquitoes? a.
What proves that mosquitoes were around at the same time as dinosaurs? a.
To cherish something means to hold it as very important.
Compassion is a feeling of understanding for someone who is hurt or suffering.
Their mother gave the children consent to go outside and play.
If someone is cunning, they are good at tricking people.
The cunning child fooled his parents into thinking that he was kind.
If someone is dizzy, then they feel off balance as if they will fall down.
The pregnant woman was dizzy after standing up too quickly.
The sudden drop in prices upset the equilibrium of the economy.
To foster a feeling or a skill means to help it develop.
She helped foster a sense of calm in the little boy.
The dog started to growl at the man walking by.
Moderation is a state of being just enough but not too much.
It is important to eat in moderation so that you can have a healthy body.
A predator is an animal that kills and eats other animals.
If someone is sane, they can think in a normal way.
Oliver does not act like a sane person when he is angry.
A saucer is a small round dish that you set a cup on.
To stagger means to move in an unsteady way and almost fall over.
To withhold something is to not give it to someone.
Which of the following means to make a noise? a.
PZiM? B Choose the right definition for the given word.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
The Traveler and the Innkeeper A traveler stopped at an inn.
I swear that I’ll spend it in moderation, and my.
The innkeeper gave his consent and pulled out some money.
The man was going to leave with the poor innkeeper’s money and never return.
He felt compassion for the nice innkeeper and did not want him to be tricked.
The cunning traveler decided to teach the innkeeper a lesson.
The traveler walked over to the innkeeper and sat down.
The innkeeper had started to grind coffee beans to make coffee.
He made the coffee and handed the traveler a saucer and a cup.
After a while the traveler yawned and then growled like a wolf.
As the traveler started to yawn a third time, the innkeeper turned to run outside.
The scared innkeeper staggered outside and tumbled into the street.
The traveler followed him out because he did not want to withhold the truth any longer.
He just wanted to foster happiness and restore the innkeeper’s emotional equilibrium.
The traveler wanted to withhold the truth and foster anger.
What did the traveler want to foster inside the innkeeper?
Why did the innkeeper consent to give the young man money? a.
Why did the innkeeper hand the traveler a saucer and a cup? a.
An aircraft is a vehicle that flies in the sky, such as an airplane or helicopter.
At the museum in the airport, you can see a lot of old aircraft.
Our boss is very decisive, so it did not take long to organize the project.
If someone is esteemed, many people like or respect them.
An esteemed scientist is coming to the university to talk about her discoveries.
If plants or animals are extinct, there are none left.
There used to be dinosaurs all over the world, but now they are extinct.
To migrate means to move from one place to another.
To nurture something means to care for it as it grows or develops.
Robert nurtured his plants, and that is why they grow so well.
If a place is rural, it is in the countryside instead of the city.
I want to live in a small house in a rural area.
There are 21 different species of butterfly in this forest.
Helen wants to study zoology because she has always liked animals.
What should I do if I want to learn about animals? a.
If you want to camp in the mountains, you need to.
Brids to warmer parts of the country during the winter.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
She wanted to go to the beach, but her husband was a zoology professor and wanted to look for some interesting animals.
So now she was traversing a swamp in the midday heat.
There were lots of birds in that secluded, rural place, and they.
Yes, it is! I’m going to take it back to the Zoology Institute.
He thought that this find would make him a highly esteemed celebrity at the Zoology Institute.
For the next few days, Gilbert fed and nurtured the lizard.
It lost its beautiful red color and began to look ordinary.
In fact, Gilbert started to wonder whether it was special at all.
He went outside and found a common lizard on a piece of concrete.
Gilbert thought that the red lizard was an extinct species.
How was Gilbert described after he found the lizard? a.
What did Gilbert think that the find would make him feel like? a.
Where did Gilbert want to take the red lizard? a.
An assumption is something that you believe is true but cannot prove.
I went to the cafeteria on the assumption that everyone would be there.
Barley is a grain that is used for animal feed, health food and beer.
The farmer grew barley to feed his cows in the winter.
A lion is one of the fiercest beasts on Earth.
If a disease is contagious, it is easily carried from one person to another.
You must wear protective clothing because the patient’s illness is contagious.
After the accident, the corpse was taken to the hospital.
To cure means to cause an illness or injury to end or disappear.
To discriminate means to judge people according to their looks.
The children harassed their mother because they wanted her attention.
The boy enjoys playing with his miniature train set in his bedroom.
Nutrition is the process by which people use food to stay healthy.
It is important to pay attention to nutrition if you want to be an athlete.
A technician is a person who is skilled in electronic or mechanical work.
I need to call the technician to help me with my computer.
PAHD1 B Choose the right definition for the given word.
PAED1 B  Match the c la u se s  to m ake com plete sentences.
I want to cut down the tree in the garden.
Colonel Wilbur and his wife Mary were flying over the tropics in their private plane.
It was impossible to extinguish the fire, so they were forced to land in the forest.
I am not a technician, and the plane is out of gasoline.
Suddenly, they saw some huts and lots of miniature people, cooking and making weapons with flint.
Wilbur tried to persuade Mary to go to the forest people, but she refused to integrate with them.
She had the assumption that the small people were dangerous.
For three days, the couple searched, but they found no one who could help them in their crisis.
It was uncomfortable, and they were hungry without any source of nutrition.
When Wilbur and Mary arrived at the village, the forest people immediately welcomed them.
They gave them bread made from barely to eat and a place to sleep.
The next day, the forest people led Wilbur and Mary through the trees, and they promptly arrived at a small town.
From there, they took a bus to the city where they found an embassy.
Mary was sorry that she had not trusted the forest people sooner.
She learned the value of not discriminating against people who are different.
Wilbur and Mary had to land in the forest because the engine caught fire.
It was possible for the colonel to extinguish the fire on the plane.
Even though the plane crashed, it still had plenty of gasoline.
Mary refused to go to the people on the assumption they had a contagious virus.
The couple searched for help in the forest for five days.
The forest people led Wilbur and Mary through the trees, and they promptly arrived at a city.
What was the bread that the forest people gave Wilbur and Mary made of?
After the crisis in the forest, Mary learned not to.
Why didn’t Mary want to integrate with the forest people? a.
A birthplace is a place where a person is born or where something started.
The capacity of something is the amount of things that can be put in it.
If something is comparative, it is being judged based on something else.
The money that John has is comparative to most other adults.
If something is comprehensive, it has all the details about something else.
The teacher gave us a comprehensive review for the exam.
To conserve something is to protect it from being ruined or used completely.
The group worked to conserve the beauty of Europe’s national parks.
To deposit something is to put it into a place or another thing.
To distribute something is to give it to a number of people.
Exotic describes something unusual because it is from far away.
Rebecca tried many exotic foods on her trip to Africa.
If something is federal, it comes from the government of a country.
Oxygen is a gas that all living things need to breathe.
My aunt believes that the oxygen in the country is cleaner than in the city.
A rainforest is a forest that is in a place where it rains very often.
A strategy is a plan for how to do something.
The team came up with a strategy to win the game.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
I like going to the park because it’s covered with trees, and I feel like I’m in the mountains.
The business’s goal is to earn more money this year than it did last year.
My mother grows unusual and unfamiliar flowers in her garden.
He needed gas required for breathing to help him survive.
This book about the history of India is full of details.
I’m going to visit a small town in Ecuador that is near the imaginary line.
The number of shoes that Jane and Beth have is judged based on something else.
Eddie didn’t want to eat it, but he knew the broccoli would be good for his health.
What is something you probably wounldn’t encounter in a rainforest?
In which place is there a high frequency of snowfall?
But another type of forest—the cloud forest—is just as beneficial to humans.
Cloud forests are also in danger of disappearing, but little is being done to save them.
These forests are located at the tops of mountains, generally near the equator.
These humid, wooded mountaintops are mainly in African and Central and South American countries.
They are called “cloud forests” because their height allows for the formation of clouds among the trees.
The trees in these forests pull water out of the clouds.
The streams flow into towns at the bottom of the mountain.
The yearly cumulative rainfall in these areas is 173-198 centimeters.
Cloud forests can pull in up to 60 percent of that.
This water is crucial to the plants and the people in the area.
Cloud forests are also the birthplace of countless species of plants that can’t be found anywhere else.
One small cloud forest has the capacity for as many types of plants as there are in all of Europe.
There are so many, in fact, that scientists haven’t made a comprehensive list of them yet.
Trees are being cut down, and roads are being built in their place.
Some people have an objective to get federal money to protect the forests.
That, too, has been difficult because the plants are so unique.
A Mark each statement T for true or F for false.
Another type of forest—the cloud forest—is just as beneficial to humans as a rainforest.
These humid, wooded mountaintops are mainly in African and European countries.
Some people have an objective to get federal money to protect the forests.
How do the trees in cloud forests make water? a.
How much water do cloud forests add to the yearly cumulative rainfall? a.
It is often used in the achievement of a goal.
His studying was to no avail because he failed the test.
A balloon will expand as you blow air into it.
To define means to clearly state, show, or explain what something is.
To dread is to be afraid of something that could, or is going to, happen.
I dread the idea that I will not get into college.
If something is horrifying, it is frightening and very unpleasant.
An organism is a living thing, especially a very small one.
To paraphrase is to make someone else’s writing or speech shorter.
The students were asked to paraphrase the story they just heard.
Presently, our profits are good, but by next year we can do even better.
If something is random, it happens without any pattern or reason.
John lives a life of solitude because he doesn’t get along well with people.
To summon a person is to ask them to come to you.
We summoned the doctor as soon as we noticed she was sick.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
His attempt to catch the train was to no waiting for the next one.
She was___________that there could be such a boys’ and girls’ grades.
Presently, we get most of our knowledge about ancient Greece from his writing.
But Thucydides didn’t just write about history, he lived through it.
However, he almost didn’t survive one historical event: the Plague of Athens.
In 430 BCE, an army attacked the city of Athens, where Thucydides lived.
Thousands of people hid from the army behind Athens’ large walls.
But it was to no avail because no one understood how the disease spread.
Instead, they defined disease as a punishment from their gods.
Thucydides was incredulous that gods caused the plague, but he explained why others believed it.
There was an old, long verse which predicted the disease.
To paraphrase it, the verse said the gods would send a disease during a war.
As a result, large crowds gathered at shrines to ask the gods to stop the plague.
But the situation only worsened because these people were so close to each other they became sick.
That’s how they learned a fundamental lesson about the plague: it spread from person to person.
People wanted to leave the crowded city, but they dreaded what the army outside would do to them.
He quickly scribbled down notes because he thought he would soon die.
His writing shows a stark contrast between people’s behavior before and during the plague.
They didn’t think they’d live long enough to be punished.
Many sick people were left to die in solitude because no one wanted to be near them.
Without his writing, we would know much less about ancient Greece and the Plague of Athens.
A Mark each statement T for true or F for false.
At first, people thought the spread of the disease was random.
Thucydides was incredulous that the plague was caused by an organism.
The first automobiles were very different from the ones that exist today.
If something is corporate, it is related to a large business.
An era is a period of time that has something special about it.
A guideline is a rule about how to do something.
Before they began the project, the teacher gave them some guidelines.
To interact is to talk to or do something with another person.
The kids began to interact when the adults left the room.
Tony rested for brief intervals while he worked in the yard.
To modify something is to change it a little bit.
I modified my outfit by adding a belt to it.
If two things are parallel, they are the same distance away from each other.
There are two yellow parallel lines dividing both sides of traffic.
To pollute means to make air, water, or land dirty, unclean, or foul.
If something is solar, it is related to the sun.
A tournament is a competition, usually with many people participating.
Transportation is any type of vehicle that can carry people or things.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
A survey found that not very many people like the__________
So he is trying to think of ways to___________ his image and make people like him.
The information in them was about important customers and had to be kept__________
People back then would have been even more amazed by today’s ___________ music players.
Jane had trouble parking it between the___________ lines in the parking lot.
Instead, he___________me and continued to drive fast, eventually causing an accident.
The___________for the race are very simple: just run as fast as you can.
It made several of its ___________smaller so that it could create a new one.
It allows students from all over the city to___________with each other.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Factories built in the early 1900s contine to unleash chemicals into the air.
My soccer team is playing in a competition next weekend.
When the new buildings are finished, they will be the same distance away from each other.
In order for my science project to work, I need to alter it.
Amy hurt Jane’s feelings when she made fun of her.
In this period of time, it’s more common for kids to play video games than read books.
Kate is very shy and doesn’t like to talk to and do things with the other girls.
My grandfather used to race cars across the long distances in endurance races.
A bus Which of the following is a form of transportation? a.
But the cars we drive require too much gas, plus they pollute.
Eventually, the natural resources used to make gas will run out.
So what happens then? Many people think solar-powered automobiles are the answer.
To learn more about this type of transportation, teams from universities and corporate organizations gather in Australia every two years for a solar car race.
They don’t interact with other teams because the race is very competitive.
And these cars aren’t just enhanced and modified versions of normal cars.
The cars only have room for one person and are very simple inside—they don’t even have a cushion for the driver to sit on.
These cars are shorter and much more flat than normal cars.
Most importantly, the cars incorporate solar panels onto the outside that lie parallel to each other.
These panels are made from materials that take in light from the sun and turn it into electric energy.
These cars race over 3,000 kilometers across the Australian territories.
They must stop at certain intervals to charge their batteries.
And unlike normal race cars, they can’t go very fast.
Although the drivers want to finish the race quickly, that is not the main goal.
The objective is to see how well the cars work under normal driving conditions.
Because of the World Solar Challenge, a new era in car making and in driving is beginning.
People may ridicule the solar cars because they look strange, but this is a phenomenon that isn’t going away.
Using the technology from the vehicles, car makers will eventually create solar cars for the rest of us.
A Mark each statement T for true or F for false.
The cars incorporate metal panels on the outside that lie parallel to each other.
These cars drive less than 3,000 kilometers across the Australian territories.
They must stop at certain intervals to put air in their tires.
The objective of the race is to find out how the solar cars_____ a.
A boundary is the line where one area of land stops, and another begins.
This fence shows the boundary between our yard and yours.
Chaos is a situation that is confusing and not ordered.
If a person is consistent, they keep the same behavior or attitude.
Sara comes in every day and is our most consistent worker.
If someone or something is doomed, they are going to fail or be destroyed.
Since I spent all my money, my date with Jane is doomed.
Poultry is a bird, such as a chicken, that is used for meat and eggs.
He raises poultry and sells their meat for extra money.
A sergeant is a soldier or police officer of middle rank.
He was promoted to sergeant after a year in the army.
If you describe something as sheer, it is complete and very strong.
A stance is an attitude about an issue that someone states clearly.
My stance is that using oil and gas is bad for the environment.
A telegraph is a method of sending electric messages on wires.
In the 1900s, the telegraph was the fastest way to send a message.
Which of the following is a kind of storm? a.
Which of the following would come from a farm? a.
Which of the following would help students taking a test? a.
They couldn’t succeed in business, and they never agreed about anything.
Martin was a hardworking farmer, growing organic vegetables and raising poultry.
But he was disorganized and forgot to pay his bills.
He was organized, but he was greedy and took too much clothing.
He ran a martial arts school, but his stance on discipline was too strong.
One day, they received a telegraph saying that their father had died.
They planned to sell it as soon as possible, so they went to see it even though there was a terrible storm.
The house didn’t look great, but there was a lot of land.
There was so much, in fact, that they could barely see its boundary.
The sheer force of the wind almost knocked them over.
Martin said, “Look, it’s a typhoon!” Paul said, “No, it’s a cyclone.” Tom said, “No, it’s a tornado!” They argued until Paul began to wail and said, “Whatever it is, it’s coming right at us! We’re doomed!” The three brothers scrambled inside the old house.
This farm could be great if we fixed it up.
With my hard work, Paul’s organization and Tom’s discipline, we could run a great business.
Just think,” Martin said, “it took the chaos of a typhoon to bring us together.” Paul replied, “You mean a cyclone.
Tom was a farmer who grew organic vegetables and poultry.
Tom was a sergeant in the army before running a martial arts school.
The brothers learned of their father’s death through a telegraph.
No part of this book n a y  be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
About the Vocabulary The 600 words in each book of this series along with the additional target words presented in the appendices included in the first three books of the series are the most useful words in English.
They were found by analysis of a collection of English course books from various levels in the primary, secondary and tertiary school systems.
The words included in this series were chosen because they occurred many times in different levels of these materials.
Because of the way that they were chosen, these words have the following characteristics:
No matter what English course you are studying, the words in these books will be of value to you.
This means that the effort in learning the words is well repaid by the number of times learners have a chance to encounter or use them.
These books as a whole cover a large proportion of the words in any spoken or written text.
They also cover at least 90% of the words in conversation.
About the Books The activities in these books are specially designed to make use of important learning conditions.
Firstly, the words are introduced using sentence definitions and an example sentence.
The activities that follow in the units encourage learners to recall the meanings and forms of the words.
Some activities also make the learners think about the meaning of the words in the context of a sentence— a sentence different from the sentences that occurred in the introduction of the words.
Moreover, each unit ends with a story containing the target words.
While reading the story, the learners have to recall the meanings of the words and suit them to the context of the story.
Such activities help learners develop a better understanding of a common meaning for a given word which fits the different uses.
Illustrations for each target word are provided to help learners visualize the word as it is being used in the example sentence.
It should be noted that words have more than one grammatical category.
However, this series focuses on the word’s most common form.
This is mentioned to remind learners that just because a word is labeled and utilized as a noun in this series does not mean that it can never be used in another form such as an adjective.
Supporting Learning w ith Outside Activities A well-balanced language course provides four major opportunities for learning: learning through input, learning through output, deliberate learning, and fluency development.
The highly structured activities in these books support all four types of learning opportunities.
In addition, learning can further be supported through the following activities:
Have students create vocabulary cards with one word from the unit on one side of the card and the translation of the word in the student’s first language on the other side.
Students should use the cards for study in free moments during the day.
Over several weeks, students will find that quick repeated studying for brief periods of time is more effective than studying for hours at one sitting.
Reading such books provides both enjoyment as well as meaning-focused input which w ill help the words stick in students’ memory.
Practice reading fluency to promote faster recall of word meaning for both sight recognition and usage.
Compass Publishing’s Reading for Speed and Fluency is a good resource for reading fluency material.
Reinforcement of the high-frequency vocabulary presented in this series is important across all the four.
His specialist interests are language teaching m ethodology and vocabulary learning.
A blacksmith is a person who makes things out of metal.
The blacksmith pounded the piece o f metal until it  was flat.
When someone is charitable, they help people who are in need.
My sister was charitable enough to help me buy my firs t house.
A chimney is a tall pipe used to carry smoke out of a building.
The cat was on the roo f sitting next to the chimney.
If you encounter something, you meet or come close to it.
Since I exceeded my lim it, I decided to get rid  o f my credit cards.
To forge is to make or produce, especially with difficulty.
Stacy and Heather forged their friendship when they were teenagers.
People who are humble do not believe that they are better than other people.
Even though Bob is the smartest boy in his class, he is humble.
Iron is a strong metal that is used to make many objects.
To occupy a place is to live, work, or be there.
Kevin and Alice occupied the chairs and had a long discussion.
Satisfaction is a feeling you get when you do or receive something good.
Brad was filled  with satisfaction when he saw what was fo r dinner.
Wind power is a clean way to sustain a city with energy.
Exercise A Choose the right word for the given definition.
DMSiJ B Choose the right definition for the given word.
Exercise 2 Choose the answer that best fits the question.
If you meet a boy on the street, yo u  him.
Which word relates to the word re lig ion? a.
Which of the following do people use to reach high places? a.
If you are smart with your money, then what w ill happen to you? a.
If someone gives money to others, we could say that they a re.
Which of the following describes someone who thinks they are no better than others? a.
A long time ago, a man named Marcus occupied a house with his family.
He always told everybody he was the strongest man in the province.
He worked hard, but he could barely sustain his family.
Still, he could never earn a penny more than he needed.
The blacksmith agreed to compensate him with a lot of money.
In the same town, there was a man named Nicholas.
But he also believed that he should be humble and charitable.
He learned that helping people gave him even more satisfaction than preaching.
I worked hard for him,”  Marcus said, “ but a problem arose.
Nicholas climbed up a ladder and dropped the bag of gold down the chimney.
Marcus told Nicholas about his problem when he encountered Nicholas.
Nicholas got a lot of satisfaction from being charitable and humble.
Marcus was compensated by the blacksmith for helping forge iron.
The money that Nicholas gave Marcus exceeded the amount he needed.
Which of the following is true about the job Marcus did?
Why didn’t Nicolas tell people that he gave money away? a.
A caretaker is a person who takes care of very young, old, or sick people.
He tried to deceive his friends as they were playing a game.
To discourage someone is to make them feel less excited about something.
If something is inferior, it is not as good as something else.
Cars bu ilt a hundred years ago are inferior to ones bu ilt today.
A lodge is a house in the mountains, used by people who hunt or fish.
To neglect someone or something is to not take care of it properly.
William neglected his room, so it is a complete mess.
An offense is behavior that is wrong or breaks a law.
To overlook something is to not notice it, or to not realize that it is important.
Brenda overlooked the last step and had a bad fall.
She repaid her friend for a ll o f his hard work with a small gift.
A shepherd is a person who protects and cares for sheep.
To venture is to go to a place that may be dangerous.
Even though it  was dangerous, they ventured up the mountain.
The fie ld  o f golden wheat was ready to be harvested.
Exercise 2 Circle two words that are related in each group.
Exercise 3 Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
The girl didn’t tike th e ___________ , so she played a joke on them.
She was eager t o ____________the boy that had helped her repair her bike.
While others had s im p ly____________her, he was happy to help.
She had a ____________for food with tomatoes, but everything else on the menu was.
One night, he saw some wild sheep had joined his herd.
In the morning, the shepherd couldn’t take his sheep out of his lodge.
He gave a small amount of wheat to his own sheep.
But he gave more of the food to the wild sheep.
He thought the extra wheat would discourage them from leaving.
As soon as he opened the door of his hut, the wild sheep started to run away.
Yesterday you treated us kindly, but tomorrow you might be different.
As the wild sheep ran away, the shepherd understood his offense.
The shepherd counted his sheep because he didn’t want to overlook any of them.
The shepherd couldn’t take the sheep outside because it was dark outside.
The shepherd gave a little  wheat to the wild sheep.
The wild sheep ran away from the shepherd after the snow melted.
The wild sheep thought the shepherd had neglected his own sheep.
How did the shepherd hope to discourage the wild sheep from running away? a.
All of the following describe what kind of caretaker the shepherd was EXCEPT__ a.
She used an ax to cut some wood fo r the fire.
She was hungry, so she ate the entire bunch o f grapes.
A chore is a job that you have to do but don’t like.
It’s Nikki’s chore to do the dishes every Tuesday and Wednesday night.
When something is decent, it is OK or good enough.
He fe lt a sense o f disgrace after fa iling his big exam.
The elbow is the middle part of a person’s arm that lets you bend it.
She pointed to her elbow to show me where she hurt herself.
She was irrita ted when her brother told her that he had lost her camera.
To kid is to make a joke to make someone believe something which is not true.
When something is loose, it is not held in place well.
The bolt was loose, so I tightened it  with the wrench.
To offend someone means to make them angry or upset.
They were both offended by what they had said to each other.
To persist means to keep doing something even when it is hard.
Even though the lesson was difficult, he persisted until he understood.
A pine is a type of tree that is tall and thin.
A sled is a small vehicle that you use on snow.
Marvin likes to ride his sled down the h ill in winter.
To tease someone means to laugh at or make fun of them.
P/M'O1 A Choose the right word for the given definition.
Exercise 2 Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
He needed it to cut down a(n) in his yard.
It w ill be windy tomorrow, so I must work to fix it so it does not blow away.
She must put all of the leaves into a ___________to get the job done.
But he will his friend if he continues this action.
He thought that until he got a haircut, Elena would never be his.
The Boy and his Sled Mike was the smallest child in school.
One day, Joe offended Mike when he made fun of Mike’s valentine, Jane.
Mike felt disgrace, but he didn’t know how to make Joe stop.
He found a bunch of wood boards next to a pine tree.
He used nails to make sure that the pieces were not loose.
As he worked, he bumped his elbow on the boards.
Joe didn’t know why Mike wanted him to come over.
I just built this sled, and I’ ll let you.
Joe offended Mike by saying mean things about his valentine, Jane.
Joe was a decent person at the beginning of the reading.
Mike told Joe he was sharing his new sled because he was a civil person.
Dessert is a sweet food that you eat after a meal.
A curl is a small piece of something with a round shape.
Grace is a quality of moving in a smooth, relaxed and attractive way.
All o f mankind has to work to make this a better world.
Passion is a very strong feeling of wanting to do something.
A pillow is something that you put your head on when you sleep.
When I travel, I usually take along my favorite pillow.
The doctor checked the patient’s pulse by feeling his wrist.
To refresh someone is to make them feel less hot or tired.
To sneeze is to suddenly blow air out of your nose and mouth.
Two common spices found in many homes are salt and pepper.
To whistle is to make a sound by putting your lips together and blowing.
Grandma wants to use the blue wool to knit me a sweater.
PCra1 B Choose the right definition for the given word.
Exercise 2 Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
One way to use less fuel is to drive a.
She___________ a song while she took a shower t o.
When my father was a boy, he learned all about a sheep’s.
She was afraid she might get others sick if she got in.
Tiny Tina In a distant land, there was a kingdom where fairies lived.
However, because of her compact size, she was scared of mankind.
She became sleepy and made a pillow with some leaves.
She whistled happily as she worked, and she fell asleep.
She saw a very big face looking at her! Tina was so scared that she couldn’t move.
The woman sat on the ground among some decaying leaves.
Tina dipped a finger in the cup and tasted it.
It was tea with all kinds of delicious spices in it.
I spend all my leisure time in my garden cutting flowers.
The fairies left because they were scared by the eclipse.
To acquaint is to get to know something or someone.
To curse someone or something is to hope that bad things happen to them.
A disguise is something you wear so people cannot tell who you are.
Everyone knew that it  was Dad in the Santa disguise.
Their table was a ll set fo r a fancy dinner.
A flashlight is a small electric light that you carry in your hand.
We took a flash ligh t when we went camping.
A hood is part of a coat that goes over your head.
She pu t on her hood to keep her head warm.
To nourish something is to give it food that it needs to live.
A good mother w ill nourish her baby every day.
A pirate is a sailor who steals things from other boats.
A riddle is a question that is d ifficult to answer but meant to be funny.
I could not answer Wendy’s riddle, but it made me laugh.
If something is wicked, it is very bad or evil.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
I don’t like to walk in the are under the ground there.
When my friend stayed at my house, we sat with a we sat and to ld ____________for an hour!
Since then, I have read every book they have abou t___________
Which of the following is most related to death? a.
Which of the following is most commonly related to the ocean? a.
Exercise 3 Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Mom says we need to hurry because the game w ill start very soon.
It’s a good idea to get to know with co-workers.
My little brother bothered me all day by asking me to solve his d ifficu lt questions.
I am an individual who lives in the central part of town.
He was crying because he was caused to feel fright.
I want to buy that really nice dress I saw in the store.
I need a light I can carry to see in the dark cabin.
The children were afraid that the witch would hope bad things would happen to them.
The part of your coat that covers your head keeps your head nice and warm.
Trick-or-treat! Many different cultures have had traditions about the dead.
Ireland, China, Egypt and Mexico believed that souls needed food.
They thought the food nourished them on their journey from cemeteries to heaven.
People had to put out good things for souls to eat.
However, if  the food rotted or spoiled, the soul got mad.
The wicked soul might curse the family and make them starve during the winter.
In other places, people begged for food on a holiday that remembers the souls of dead saints.
If they did not get food, they played a trick on the home.
Housewives gave the children food if they performed a song or a dance.
Today, trick-or-treaters are not begging for food, and they are not.
They just enjoy the thrill of dressing up like creatures and getting candy.
In some places, children still perform songs or riddles to get candy.
But most of the time, they just say “ Trick-or-Treat!”
People from places like Iceland, Italy, Kenya and Canada believed souls needed food.
Many cultures believed that souls needed food to nourish them on their journey back to life.
Housewives gave children food if they did chores around their homes.
Shortly after a children’s publication wrote about trick-or-treating, it became popular.
What did the souls do when they left cemeteries? a.
To alert someone is to tell or warn them about something.
The fire alarm alerted us that there was a problem.
Ne watched the broadcast o f the local news on 7V.
A bulletin is a news report that talks about very recent and important events.
There was a live bulletin  reporting on the economy o f the city.
To console someone who is sad means to make them comforted.
A district is a small part of a city, county, state, or country.
A bump is a small raised area on a surface.
The monkey got a bump on his head because he was h it by a rock.
To chop something means to cut it into pieces with a tool.
Mom chopped some vegetables to pu t into the stew.
A closet is a small room used to store things.
A drawer is a small part in furniture that is used to store things.
To endure something tough means to do or go through it.
She had to endure her husband shouting all day long.
To execute someone means to kill them as a legal punishment.
When something is in the rear of something, it is in the back.
The man loaded the rear o f his truck with boxes.
To stir something means to mix it using something small, like a spoon.
When something is underneath something else, it is below or lower than it.
The roots o f a tree are located underneath the ground.
A worm is a small animal with a long, thin body.
Choose the word that is a better fit for each blank.
When h e ____ his fist on the top of h is.
He decided to listen to the news because he could no longer.
Many toys had been piled beneath the carpet in th e.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Every Sunday, the family watched a television show about animals.
The person who makes laws sat behind a large desk.
In order to get over the wall, the cat had to make a very large jump.
Harold slowed the car down as he drove over the small raised part.
There is very little rain in mv part of the state.
Because he committed such a horrible crime, he was killed by the legal system.
The cook cut into pieces the vegetables for his soup.
Exercise 3 Choose the answer that best fits the question.
Which of the following describes something in the back? a.
Which of the following does an alarm do for people? a.
Which of the following means to go through something difficult? a.
The Senator and the Worm A rich senator lived in a big house.
One day, he was sitting on a chair listening to a radio broadcast.
As he listened to the news bulletin, a worm crawled from underneath the chair and onto his head.
His cook was in the kitchen stirring some spaghetti sauce.
He ran to the rear of the house where the senator was sitting.
He returned to the senator and lifted the pipe over his head.
The cook found a pipe in one of the drawers.
The cook knew he was going to tap the worm.
The worm was chopped in half on the senator’s head.
What was the senator doing when the worm crawled onto his head?
Which of the following did the cook NOT do? a.
Why did the senator tell the cook to hurry? a.
After the cook hit the senator, where did the worm go? a.
To abandon something is to leave it forever or for a long time.
When a dog barks, it makes a short, loud noise.
A bay is an area near the ocean where the land goes inward.
My younger sister is b rillian t for someone her age.
An expedition is a long trip, usually to a place very far away.
The horizon is where the sky looks like it meets the ground.
To be loyal to something or someone is to agree to always help them.
The mayor is the person in charge of a city.
The mayor o f my hometown is quite a powerful speaker.
If something is mutual, it is felt in the same way by two or more people.
To restore something is to put it back the way it was.
To rub something is to push on it and move your hand back and forth.
P/aMF B Choose the right definition for the given word.
Exercise 2 Choose the answer that best fits the question.
Which of the following can you feel about a holiday? a.
What do you do to improve an old house? a.
Which of these people goes on expeditions as part of their job? a.
Which of the following words is most likely to be related to the horizon? a.
Which of the following means to be rich and successful? a.
Which of the following means having the same feelings as someone else? a.
Patsy Ann A long time ago in Alaska, a dog named Patsy Ann watched the horizon.
Patsy Ann was a brilliant dog, and she was very unique.
But she used all of her other senses to know when a ship was near.
The mayor said Patsy Ann should be called the town’s greeter*
The people in town loved Patsy Ann, too, even though she lived on the streets.
A new law made all dogs wear a collar and get shots.
Together, they paid for Patsy Ann to go to the veterinarian.
When Patsy Ann died, everyone missed the town’s loyal greeter.
So the mayor hired someone to make a statue of Patsy Ann.
Now, she sits at the dock forever, waiting for ships to come home.
The law said that all dogs had to have a home to stay in town.
Patsy Ann barked at all of the ships coming in.
An anniversary is a day that celebrates something from the past.
My parents went out to eat for their wedding anniversary.
A carpenter is a person who builds things with wood.
Coal is a hard black rock that you burn for heat.
Ivory is a white, hard substance that comes from elephants.
The farmer took his wheat to the m ill to make it  into flour.
To polish something is to rub it in order to make it shiny.
Mark spent a ll morning polishing his shoes fo r the wedding.
A shed is a small building where you store things like tools.
We have a small shed in the backyard fo r storage.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
Because it was th e ir___________ , my father bought my mother a gift.
I heard a news story about something in the ____________under the ground.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
I wanted to get a little  hair cut o ff today, but I had no time to make it to the salon.
Sometimes the dog goes inside the small building with tools when it gets cold.
The old place where they made flour was interesting to visit.
Since they didn’t have a lot of money, they lived in an old shed.
But they had coal for heat, and flour from the mill for bread.
Together, they trimmed the bushes to make their house look nice.
She pulled her hair upwards every day because she didn’t have a brush to make it nice.
For their anniversary, Stella wanted to get Joe what he wanted.
It would take at least six months to save enough money.
She cut off all of her hair and sold it.
Meanwhile, Joe knew that he could never fix his watch.
But first, Stella gave him the money to fix the watch.
They were both w illing to give up something very special to make each other happy.
Stella and Joe were too poor to heat their shed with coal.
Stella used a needle and thread to sew elegant things with beautiful fabric.
What did Stella do for Joe on their anniversary? a.
To ail a person or group is to cause difficulty or pain.
My brother went to the doctor to see what was ailing him.
To boast is to talk about how good you are.
We all became tired o f listening to him boast about h im self all day.
To bounce is to move something up and away from a surface after hitting it.
A bully is a person who is mean to others.
The two bullies always picked on the smaller, weaker kids.
To crawl is to move slowly on your hands and knees.
If you show mercy, you choose not to punish or harm someone.
He asked his boss fo r mercy and to not fire him.
To nod is to move your head up and down.
I nodded my head as I listened to the song.
On the field, our opponents were too good fo r us.
Billy quarreled with his wife about buying a new house.
A rival is someone that is trying to keep you from getting what you want.
The three rivals were all competing fo r the same job.
To wrestle is to play a game where you try to push someone to the floor.
My dad loved to wrestle when he was in high school.
Exercise 2 Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Foods like bread and rice give you a lot of energy for an active lifestyle.
We were all sad after our team was beaten in the game.
I was caused pain by a sharp point as I was walking through the grass barefoot.
Look at the numbers on the clock face to see what time it is.
If you can’t speak, then move your head up and down for yes and no.
The person who was fighting against me tried to catch me off guard.
I tried very hard to lift the heavy boxes from the desk.
Sitting through his long, boring speech was a horrible mental pain.
Sometimes, if boys gave Mitch their lunch money, he would have mercy and leave them alone.
One day, the boys learned about a special Middle School Olympics.
He entered the gym and looked at the dial on the clock.
He made it up so he wouldn’t have to play.
They knew the last game of the day was volleyball.
Kids who used to be Dalton’s rivals became his allies.
Every time Mitch tried to hit the ball over the net, Dalton stopped it.
But the ball bounced off Dalton’s hands and back into Mitch’s face! Finally Mitch was defeated.
Which of the following was NOT part of their Olympics?
What did boys give Mitch so he would have mercy on them? a.
What did the boys want to do to Mitch? a.
If you say something aloud, you say it so that others can hear you.
My father often reads stories aloud to me and my sister.
A blanket is a piece of cloth that you use to keep warm or to sit upon.
I la id a blanket on the ground so that we could have a picnic.
Divorce is an event in which a marriage is ended.
To imitate someone is to do exactly what they do.
He im itated his favorite superhero by putting on a costume.
A nap is a short sleep, usually during the day.
I took a short nap because I stayed up late last night.
To reproduce is to make something exactly how someone else did it.
The children tried to reproduce their house using toy blocks.
To rhyme is to have the same sounds at the end of a word.
Humpty Dumpty is an old rhyme that children learn in school.
To suck is to put something in your mouth and try to get flavor out of it.
If something is urgent, it is important and needs to be done now.
A wagon is a cart you use to carry heavy things.
He used his wagon to carry some o f his gifts.
What is it called when you don’t have something? a.
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
I  I asked my m om ____________where she was going.
I  The___________ has perfect skin w ithout any scars or.
Then my mom me I  on the back and told me to get up.
I  I was scared when my big sister left me in th e.
It was such a to be finished with the long exam.
I was so tired afterward that I needed to take a.
Anna the Babysitter Since her parents got a divorce, Anna has had to help her mother.
She put Grace in the wagon, but there was nowhere for them to go.
Anna put the infant on the floor and went into her room.
But when she came back, Grace had vanished! Anna looked everywhere, but she could not find her sister.
Maybe the baby had been kidnapped! “ Where are you?” Anna called aloud.
She wanted to call her mom, but she didn’t want her to think Anna couldn’t do the job.
Grace had followed Anna into her room and crept under the bed.
She picked up her sister and patted her on the head.
So, Anna wrapped her in a blanket and sang rhymes for her.
After that afternoon, Anna knew that taking care of Grace was notan easy job.
It takes a lot of work to take care of a baby!
Anna took care of Grace in her mother’s absence because her parents got a divorce.
Anna imitated a cat, and Grace reproduced the sounds she made.
When Anna came back from her room, she found that the infant had been kidnapped.
Anna sang rhymes for Grace to try to find her more quickly.
A compass is a device used to tell what direction one is going.
A compass is an im portant tool to have when you are traveling.
A dwarf is a creature from stories that often looks like a short, hairy man.
The dw arf had a pleasant look on his face.
A leaf is the flat green thing on trees or bushes.
In the fall, the leaves on the trees change colors.
A manuscript is an old book or paper written by hand.
A marsh is a type of wet land covered with grasses and short plants.
The dinosaur was in pursu it o f the caveman.
To recite something means to repeat or say aloud in front of a group.
PZ^ Efir B Choose the right definition for the given word.
What would you call some place where no one lives?
What would someone sailing in the ocean use to know which way they were going?
Which of the following is a part of a plant?
Exercise 3 Choose the word that is a better fit for each blank.
I The__________ was so old that the words were hard to read.
I Many___________ try to teach lessons about human qualities such as honesty and.
It said that the powder didn’t hurt children forthem  to consume.
Because it is easy to lose your way in th e.
One day, he was in pursuit of a deer and became lost.
He felt relaxed so he drank some water and fell asleep.
When he awoke, he saw an evil dwarf staring at him.
He recited the magic words, and a line appeared on the map.
Here’s a proverb for you to th ink about,” it said, “ When.
When people entered the Magic Marsh, they always came out.
How did Peter know he was in the Magic a.
What did the dwarf have that could help | a.
To anticipate something is to th ink that it w ill happen.
A barrel is a round thing that you can keep liquids in.
You can wear casual clothes to the party like jeans.
Caution is care and attention in order to avoid danger.
If something is contrary to something else, it is the opposite.
To dissolve something is to mix it into a liquid and disappear.
I dissolved the p ill in a glass o f water.
The sw ift horse easily jum ped over the hurdle.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
When the house burned, a large heaw bar fell from the ceiling.
Joshua smiled in great emotion and feeling after he got a good grade on his science test.
She walked on the ice with care so she wouldn’t fall.
It was scary when the car blew up, but luckily no one was hurt.
I used a small towel from the sink to clean up the milk I spilled.
You can wear relaxed and simple clothes to the school.
When we lit the fire, a little  smoke came out of the chimney.
You take flour from the barrel and put it in.
Then add water and sugar here and stir it so the sugar dissolves.
He made a few swift motions and turned it on.
There was a puff of smoke, and then cones came out the other end.
He smiled in triumph! Uncle John tried to turn the machine off, but it just kept making cones.
Uncle John put them on the counter, then on chairs.
They tried everything to stop it, but it wouldn’t stop! “ What are we going to do?”  he said.
Uncle John lifted his foot and gave the machine a kick.
He tossed Sam a rag to clean his face and smiled.
When a person is bitter, they are upset with someone or a situation.
He was extremely b itte r when his computer crashed.
A bullet is a small metal object that is shot out of guns.
To drift means to be moved slowly by wind or water.
The large chunk o f ice drifted in the water.
A port is a place where ships stop to load and unload things.
The ship was being loaded with materials at the port.
A sheriff is a police officer who is in charge of a large area.
It was the sheriff’s job to make the city safe.
To sweat means to lose liquid from the body through the skin.
With their good deeds, the children tried to unify the world.
To worship means to like and honor a person, thing, or religious figure.
Choose the word that is a better fit for each blank.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
I will go on a long journey to lapan this spring.
The part of a gun that you pull to make it fire broke off the old gun.
The police officer in charge of a large area arrested the criminal who robbed the bank.
There is a beautiful water source at the shopping mall.
My brother likes to hide in the closet and suddenly scare me.
The president wants to bring together the people of her country.
We sailed the boat into the area where the boats are supposed to land.
Exercise 3 Choose the answer that best fits the question.
How would a person feel if  they were upset about a situation?
Dan was a millionaire, but he paid his police officers almost nothing.
Once, Dan even put his own brother in ja il for throwing a coin into a fountain! Sometimes he pointed his gun into the air and pulled the trigger.
He just wanted to scare people with the loud sound.
Finally, the people of Oceantown decided that they had to get rid of Sheriff Dan.
With their understanding, the crowd sought to unify the town.
He was startled by the sight when he ran to the door.
When he opened the door, the crowd jumped on him.
They used a rope to tie him to a chair.
Dan yelled, “ Get your hands off of me! I’ ll put you all in ja il for the rest of your lives!”
They carried Dan to the harbor and put him aboard a vessel.
He begged, “ If you let me go, I will give you all my money!”
We’ re sending you on a voyage to the middle.
The people voted for a new sheriff who was kind and fair.
Dan pulled the trigger on his gun and shot bullets in the air to scare away criminals.
With their understanding, the crowd sought to unify the town.
According to the reading, why did the crowd send Dan away? a.
A bandage is a piece of cloth used to stop bleeding.
I f  you cut yourself, please get a bandage from the first-a id kit.
A crown is the hat worn by a king or queen.
If someone is diligent, they work hard and are careful.
Craig has always been a very d iligent person at work.
Fiber is a thread of a substance used to make clothes or rope.
To kneel is to put one or both knees on the ground.
Daryl got down on one knee and asked Nina to marry him.
A priority is something that is more important than other things.
My p rio rity  is to get good grades in school.
To scold means to criticize one angrily because they have done wrong.
Jesse was scolded by the teacher for not paying attention.
Exercise 1 Choose the right word for the given definition.
Exercise 2 Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The dinner plates with designs made of gold were a treat but not needed.
Joan is a person who gets paid to cook in a restaurant.
George started to lose blood when he cut his finger.
The book was so bad that I couldn’t read the whole thing.
It is rude to walk away when someone is talking to you.
Everyone is supposed to get down on one knee when the king walks past.
Where would you probably not see someone wearing a robe? a.
What is a good way to bond with a person? a.
Which answer below would not be considered an important priority? a.
Ifyou are assuring someone of something, what are you doing? a.
Besides a departure time, airplane tickets w ill also have what other kind of time? a.
But the chef was a horrible person to work for.
He was impolite and scolded his workers all the time.
The apprentice’s first priority was to make the best food in the world.
He was happy to have a good teacher, but he didn’t like the chef.
The boy was a diligent worker, but the chef scolded him more than anyone else.
He was working very fast, and he made a mistake.
He cut his hand with a knife, and it started to bleed.
The apprentice gave him a bandage, but the chef still couldn’t cook.
Everyone in the restaurant kneeled when the emperor came in.
After his departure, the chef was very proud and very thankful to his new friend, the apprentice.
The apprentice helped the chef make food for the Emperor.
The chef was very polite and always scolded his workers.
Why did the chef panic before the Emperor arrived? a.
Why was the chef a bad person to work for? a.
An affair is an event or a thing that happened.
My wife and I attended a formal affa ir over the weekend.
An assembly is a group that is together for the same reason.
The students had an assembly to talk about their interests.
To bless is to ask God for protection or help.
The angel blessed the newborn baby to keep it  safe.
Cereal is a food that you mix with milk and eat for breakfast.
Cereal is a fast and common breakfast food enjoyed in the U.S.
A famine is a long time with little  or no food.
The farmers couldn’t grow any food on the dry soil, so there wasafamm.
A harvest is the act o f collecting food from farming.
They had a lo t o f wheat from the last harvest.
A nut is a hard seed or fru it that comes from some trees and bushes.
To eat a nut, firs t you have to crack its shell.
To pardon is a way to ask someone to repeat what was said before.
Pardon me teacher, but could you repeat what you jus t said?
The pharaohs ruled Egypt fo r thousands o f years.
To roast something is to cook it in an oven or over a fire.
A routine is a way of doing things that is the same every time.
My father’s daily routine includes shaving righ t before breakfast.
Our new stove helps us to cook food much faster than before.
A theft is a criminal act that involves someone stealing something.
The theft o f his TV took place when he was at work.
Exercise 2 Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The sun has a larger length across its center than the Earth.
The criminal act of taking something stunned the classroom of friends.
The woman wanted the religious man to ask God for help for her.
During the longtim e with no food, her family had to move to the city.
The oil company used for greedy reasons the resources o f the poor country.
Since he is very skinny, most of his clothes don’t fit him too well.
My thing that I do everyday consists of going to work, the health club, and finally home.
Would you repeat what you just said to me? I d idn’t quite understand.
In history class, the students learned about the kings of ancient Egypt.
After eating much of the food from th e ___________ , she was no longer very.
Since there was now plenty of food, the pharaoh decided to have a party.
When he arrived at the feast, hundreds of long tables were filled with food.
He could also smell hot roasted meat cooking on the stove.
However, during the feast, Monkey thought of a scheme to exploit the pharaoh’s kindness.
He decided to steal some of the food and then eat it at home.
After the feast, Monkey took the food to his house and ate it.
But on the fifth day, the pharaoh had a surprise.
He was going to give all the animals a home.
But when he arrived at the pharaoh’s home, he could not get through the door.
The diameter of his waist was wider than the doorway.
Monkey asked the pharaoh to forgive him for his theft.
Everybody else w ill have a home now, but not you.
There was plenty of ripe fruit at the party from the harvest.
The diameter of Monkey’s waist was wider than the doorway.
The tables were full of all of the following EXCEPT.
What stopped Monkey from entering the party on the fifth day? a.
I An adolescent is a young person or a teenager.
The adolescent was excited about getting a skateboard for his birthday.
I To hinder is to keep someone or something from doing something.
All the traffic hindered me from getting to work on time.
I Justice is fairness in the way that you treat other people.
People turn to the court system when they are seeking justice.
To many people, the Statue o f Liberty is a symbol o f freedom.
A p ill is a small object that has medicine inside.
To presume is to believe something is true w ithout being certain.
Since he raised his hand, the teacher presumed he knew the answer.
To have privacy is to be away from other people.
Please hang the sign on the door so we can have some privacy.
A punishment is something that one must endure for any wrongdoing.
He was given a punishment fo r being rude to the teacher.
My sister’s stomach began to swell after she go t pregnant.
When something is tidy, it is clean and in order.
What is a group of people that decides whether someone is guilty or not?
Ifyou are going to someone’s wedding, what w ill others think? a.
Ifyou have the ability to do something, then you have.
If someone exercises regularly, what kind of person can we say they are? a.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The teacher preferred working with children instead of young people.
It was hard for the students not to feel sadness or regret at the end of the school year.
The newspaper was known for its excellent work in writing news stories.
The pregnant woman’s stomach started to grow larger and rounder.
The wall stopped his ability to see what was on the other side.
Henry’s sentence for doing wrong was to spend two years in prison.
Everybody in the group received three pieces or portions of pizza each.
I asked mv father if we had any long tubes for drinking liqu id.
The children enjoyed their freedom on the playground after school.
He always kept his room tidy and had a natural literary.
One day, he hoped to have a career in journalism.
The adolescent spent much of his time reading and liked having privacy.
But his quiet personality hindered his ability to make friends.
One day, Matthew went to the pharmacy to pick up some pills for his grandmother.
Another boy asked, “ Do you want to go to Nate’s Restaurant?” “ Sure!” Matthew said.
One of the boys said, “ Let’s leave without paying.” Matthew didn’t want to.
But he presumed his new friends wouldn’t like him if he.
Suddenly, the waiter yelled, “ Stop!” The two other boys ran, leaving Matthew there.
Leaving w ithout paying for your meal is the same as.
Matthew wants to work in the justice system when he grows up.
The jury allowed Matthew to keep his liberty, but he had to help in the community as punishment.
Which of the following is NOT a word used to describe Matthew? a.
Why did Matthew try to leave the restaurant w ithout paying for his meal? a.
Why did Matthew get to keep his liberty at the end of the story? a.
Amanda has a lo t o f affection for her little  sister Sarah.
Ash is the grey or black powder created when something is burned.
The end o f his cigar was fu ll o f ashes.
To confine something is to keep it in one place.
The elephant is confined to a cage in the zoo.
To erupt is for a volcano or something to shoot a hot substance.
The volcano erupted fo r the firs t time in ten years.
To navigate something is to control the way it moves or goes.
He took a bite o f the apple, then gave me the remainder o f it.
The slope to the top o f the mountain was very steep.
To span a length of time is to last that long.
A superstition is something magical that people believe is real.
It is a superstition that Friday the 13th is an unlucky day.
Sympathy is a feeling o f being sad for another person.
I fe lt sympathy for my sister so I got her a balloon to cheer her up.
Which of the following mean that something is not important?
What is the power that causes things to happen? a.
What is the hot liquid from a volcano called? a.
What is it called to have belief in something magical? a.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
John was very unhappy when he lost his favorite book.
Manny found a job with a local news company that deals with other businesses.
The river in front of her house is not deep.
I don’t like to keep in one place my dog; I want him to run around.
The house burned down, and there was only grey powder left.
She has to control where to go when she travels with her father.
My plan to become a farmer started when I was a child.
The people left the town when the ground started shaking.
I had a feeling of sadness for her when her dog died.
Choose the word that is a better fit for each blank.
There is great concern th a t____________from a nearby volcano w ill destroy the house easily.
When he learned of h is ___________ , he was frightened.
Perhaps I caught a virus when I had to ___________ the missing sheep from the heavy rainstorm.
When I was young, I would often___________ the countryside just for fun.
They fought all the time because they both wanted to be leaders of the agency they both worked at.
There was a superstition in their town about a magic cup.
People said the cup was in a volcano located far away.
Anyone who retrieved the cup would have their wish come true.
Before their trip, their mother said they should work together.
Even though their trips originated from the same house, each wanted to travel alone.
They had to navigate small boats across shallow rivers and climb difficult slopes.
When they finally got close to the volcano, the ground began to vibrate and the volcano erupted.
John climbed to the top of a hill to keep from getting burned.
A few moments later, his brother went up the same hill.
They were confined to the hill until the lava cooled down.
They talked about the things they had seen while wandering around the country.
They felt more sympathy and affection for each other than ever before.
The next day they left to finish the remainder of the trip together.
When they finally found the cup, they learned that it d idn’t make wishes come true.
But the trip to reach the cup taught them to work together and love each other.
The trip to find the magic cup was very easy.
The boys dismissed their mother’s advice before they left for the trip.
The boys were confined to a hilltop by the lava after the volcano erupted.
A superstition said that anyone who retrieved the cup would become the leader of the agency.
The boys had more affection and sympathy for each other after the trip.
After the volcano erupted, there was ash in the sky and lava on the ground.
To show that stories about the tree weren’t true b.
So they could complete the remainder of the trip together c.
The small fire soon blazed into a large dangerous one.
A cliff is a high and often flat wall of rock.
The w olf stood at the c lif f  and howled.
Independence is the state of being free from the control of others.
After leaving home, Sophia had a great feeling o f independence.
A knight is a soldier of high rank and skill who usually serves a king.
He was the best soldier, so the king made him a knight.
A revolution is a change to the political system by a group of people.
The revolution in Russia led to the creation o f the Soviet Union.
A spear is a long stick with a blade on one end that is used as a weapon.
If something is steep, then its slope or angle rises or falls sharply.
He rode his bike up the steep h ill to reach the top.
Troops are soldiers that fight in groups in a battle.
The samurai were some o f the most skilled warriors in the ancient world.
He had to yie ld his turn because he was in checkmate.
PASO1 A Choose the right word for the given definition.
P/a\E‘0’ B Choose the right definition for the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Miguel did not want to give up control o f his managerial powers.
With his long pointed stick with a blade at the end, he was able to defend himself.
The army was beaten, so it ran away to a safe place.
The soldiers who fought in groups during the battle were exhausted after the conflict.
The metal we wore to protect our body was heavy and hot during the summer.
We walked carefully down the sharp angle of the mountain.
A feeling of being free came over all the people after the election of a new prime minister.
The soldiers managed to hold off the attack from another group.
We heard a loud sound when the hammer hit the brick wall.
The Knight’s Plan A town was fighting for their independence from another country.
However, they were afraid of an invasion from a lot of troops.
They didn’t have enough warriors to stop them, so they asked a knight for help.
The knight put on his armor, and the warriors got their spears.
Also, only a few could attack because the path was narrow.
If the warriors yielded the path to the enemy, the town would be lost.
They ran down the mountain, out of the town, and never returned.
The knight explained, “ With a little luck, a good plan beats even a big army.”
The warriors wore armor, and the knight used a spear.
Why was the narrow path important to the knight’s plan?
After they with drew to the mountain, where did the knight and warriors stop? a.
Why didn’t the enemy th ink there was a trap? a.
A bench is a long seat for two or more people.
To confront a hard situation or person is to deal with it.
The couple has to confront each other about their problems.
A daisy is a small flower with white petals and a yellow center.
A dispute is an argument or disagreement that people have.
Karen and Brian often have disputes about s illy  things.
Horror is a feeling of being very afraid or shocked.
An incident is an event that is usually not pleasant.
Wilson had an incident where he became sick and had to leave.
An object is an inanimate thing that you can see or touch.
The chef was filled  with rage when his helpers ruined the meal.
Revenge is what you do to hurt or punish someone who hurts you.
He broke his sister’s doll as revenge after she lost his favorite book.
Shame is a bad feeling about things you have done wrong.
To sigh is to breathe out loudly and show that you are tired or sad.
Molly sighed when she looked at all the information she had to research.
To sneak is to move quietly so that no one hears or sees you.
The th ie f snuck out o f the house without anyone noticing him.
I wanted to help him but I couldn’t spare a tire.
The stem of a plant is the stick that grows leaves or flowers.
Supper is a meal that is eaten in the evening.
We usually have supper around 6 o ’clock at my house.
P/aMT A Choose the right word for the given definition.
Exercise 2 Choose the answer that best fits the question.
If a child loses their parents, what do they become?
What would you call someone who can spare time to help you?
Choose the word that is the better fit for each blank.
She went to the lawn and cut a ____________from the garden.
Since they were all full, she____________and sat on the ground instead.
The___________ of the car accident made him too scared to drive.
It wasn’t until three years after th e ___________.th a t he got into a car again.
He wasn’t usually a person who tried to g e t___________
However, when he learned that his classmates had___________ against him, he changed his position.
A dog got into the garden and ate all the flowers, leaving behind only th e ___________
He often had to ___________ into empty houses during the winter just to keep warm.
After a few days, however, he felt a sense o f____________and returned everything.
It was a cool morning, and the grass was covered in mist.
A mean farmer named Jack yelled, “ Pears for sale!” He sat on a bench, plotting how he could trick people.
He replied, “You don’t have any money!” “ Please, I haven’t had supper in days.” “ No!”  shouted the farmer.
The girl quickly ate it, but she saved the seed.
He looked for the girl, but she had snuck away.
It was empty! He suddenly realized that the orphan had tricked him.
While Jack was waiting for the tree to grow, the people had taken the pears from his cart.
They all laughed while they were eating the tender fruit.
The orphan wanted the farmer to give her a pear.
The farmer d idn’t feel shame about being unkind until after the incident.
The people in the marketplace plotted to get revenge against the farmer.
The girl sighed because she was tired of waiting for the tree to grow.
The girl snuck away before the farmer could confront her.
What object did the girl keep after she ate the pear?
What was the dispute between the orphan and the farmer about? a.
What did the girl do immediately after she put the seed in the ground? a.
What happened to the farmer’s pears at the end of the story? a.
A cub is a baby animal, such as a bear or lion.
Dawn is the time of day when the sun rises.
I was dissatisfied with their decision to work on Sunday.
When something is done with ease, it is not hard to do.
When something is evident, it is easy to see or understand.
It was evident from the look on his face that he was unhappy.
To howl means to make a long, loud sound like a wolf or a dog.
He had to leap over the gap to reach the other side o f the hill.
If something is beneath something else, it is under it.
The largest part o f an iceberg lies beneath the waterline.
An outcome is the end of an action or event.
The outcome o f his latest business plan was a complete failure.
A pile is a large group of things on top of one another.
The p ile  o f cups was beginning to tilt.
One tra it o f Salvador’s personality is his cheerfulness.
Exercise 2 Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The princess looked beautiful and grand in her new dress.
It is a needed thing to hold your breath when swimming under water.
The runner was pleased with the end of the race.
My father w ill be unhappy if I do not clean my bedroom.
The early news program comes on TV at the time the sun rises.
We covered the trap with a large group of sticks and grass.
Ifyou complete a task with no problem, then it was done with what?
Which of the following is the one that a police officer would seize? a.
A leap is most s im ilarto  which of the following? a.
Ifyou are beneath your friend, then where is he? a.
What is something that would make you feel terrific? a.
She knew how to hide and how to seize prey.
Mother Wolf lived in a den beneath a tree with her cub, Little Wolf.
Little Wolf crawled out of the den and called all the large animals for help.
They went to the den and pulled away the branches.
Which is NOT a trait of a terrific hunter like Mother Wolf?
According to the reading, why did Mother Wolf squeeze her cub? a.
When you become accustomed to something, you are in the habit of it.
If someone is astonished, they are very surprised or shocked.
To bang is to hit something to make a noise.
The drummer banged on his drum as he marched in the parade.
The Lee clan meets every year to celebrate the New Year.
The students pu t special emphasis on chapter 4 because it  will be on ti.
A fable is a short story that teaches a lesson.
In the fable about the tortoise and the hare, the lesson is consistency.
At Thanksgiving, I enjoy a wonderful feast with my family.
When something is hollow, it has an empty space inside.
Straws are hollow, so liqu id  can flow  through them.
Instinct is the natural way that people behave w ithout thinking about it.
A joint is a place of the body where the bones meet, such as the knee.
Two important bones in your leg meet a t a jo in t in your knee.
To leak is to let a liquid or gas pass through a flaw.
To sacrifice something valuable is to give it up to get something else.
Her parents sacrificed a lo t o f money in order for her to go to college.
The b ird was standing on the tree’s s t if f  branch.
To stroke is to move a hand over something or someone.
She stroked her cheek to see i f  there was something on it.
When something is tragic, it is connected with death and suffering.
The students played a fam ilia r tune fo r the audience.
Exercise 2 Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Since she’s lived in hot places all her life, she’s used to warm weather.
The holes in the old pipes let water pass through onto the bathroom floor.
Her back felt hard to move after she slept on the floor.
He was happy to go home and see the group of family and friends.
The very shocked crowd watched as the magician performed his tricks.
The school served a large meal in honor of the new principal.
The only thing that I could see in the dark night was my flashlight making light.
It was a very sad event when his parents passed away in the accident.
Her natural behavior told her to leave the room as soon as possible.
Choose the word that is a better fit for each blank.
At first nobody believed him, but everyone w as___________ when he made a cat disappear.
After hearing the bad news, she____________her fist on the table in anger.
Though the food was good, he felt sick after th e ___________
He just wasn’t _to eating so much at one time.
He wanted to make sure that my pain wasn’t a problem with th e ___________
They wanted to ___________ that they were interested in protecting students.
He wanted to find out where his sister went after school, so he hid in a ___________ tree in the schoolyard.
In the ____________light, it was hard to find the earring she’d dropped on the floor.
Still, his family m ade____________ to make sure he was always comfortable.
He shut the door to make sure that no light cou ld____________into the room.
The Old Man with a Bump An old man had a large bump on his face.
It leaked a little, but there was no other place he could wait.
When the rain stopped, his joints felt stiff from sitting.
No one could affirm that the stories were true, though.
Still, his instincts told him that there was something out there.
They were having a great feast and banging on drums.
Then the leader asked, “ Who’s the best dancer here?”
The monsters agreed that they had to take his bump.
After they did, the man stroked his face to make sure it was gone.
He had tricked them! He never went back, and he never had to worry about his bump again.
The physician told the old man there was nothing he could do.
The old man waited in the hollow tree even though it leaked a little.
The old man’s joints were s tiff from walking in the forest.
The old man’s instincts told him to return home immediately.
Why did the man have to wait inside a hollow tree? a.
Why did the old man come out from behind the tree? a.
Why does the old man stroke his face at the end of the story? a.
If two things coincide, they happen at the same time.
To commission someone to do something is to pay them to do it.
The extent of something is how large, important, or serious it is.
He ate to such an extent that he became overweight.
The headline on the front page was about the economy.
They had an inform al meeting to talk about their experiences.
Dad called to inquire about the price o f tickets fo r the show.
A messenger is one who carries information from one place to another.
I saw many religious portraits when I went to the museum.
To pose is to stay in one place w ithout moving.
The kids and their dog posed fo r a picture.
When an animal is tame, it is not afraid to be near people.
To tempt people is to offer them something they want but shouldn’t have.
I wasn’t hungry, but she tempted me with a piece o f my favorite cake.
P/^EO1 A Choose the right word for the given definition.
A category of being either a boy or a girl a.
PAEfiT B Choose the right definition for the given word.
Choose the word that is a better fit for each blank.
The tra iner____ the .tiger with a treat, but the animal remained in his place.
He lived on a ranch near a small town, and he didn’t have many.
Ben was very excited as his father steered the car through the town.
The circus couldn’t accommodate all the people who wanted to see the show, but Ben had a ticket.
They wore funny costumes, and their hair was dyed many different.
Also, tame tigers with stripes on their fur did tricks.
He loved the circus to such an extent that he wanted to have his own circus when he grew older.
Seeing the circus was like a dose of medicine for him.
Ben worked very hard, and one day, he had his own circus.
Ben was commissioned to paint informal portraits of people posing in front of a funny picture.
Why did Ben like the circus to such an extent?
If a person or animal is fierce, they are angry or violent.
An Aborigine is a native of Australia before Europeans lived there.
To ban something is to not let people do it.
Ifyou are cautious, you are careful in a dangerous situation.
A cottage is a small, old house in the countryside.
My aunt lives in a pretty cottage in the mountains.
Daytime is the time of the day when the sky is light.
I only allowed my kids to play outside in the daytime.
Ifyou are desperate, you w ill try anything to do or change something.
My dad keeps the lawn in front o f our house very neat.
To mow grass is to cut it to make it very short.
An outlaw is a criminal who hides from the police.
The police passed out posters o f the outlaw to a ll the people.
A prospect is a possibility that something w ill happen.
He wakes up every morning with the prospect o f having a good day.
A purse is a bag where women keep money, makeup and keys.
What does it mean if you’ ll try anything to make a change? a.
What does a person with a lot of opportunities have? a.
What should a person be like if they are handling something dangerous? a.
What might happen to someone who doesn’t follow the rules of a library? a.
They may only be allowed to enter during the daytime.
What happens to a cloth that is washed too many times? a.
Exercise 2 Choose the word that is a better fit for each blank.
The o ld ____________sat in his hideout trying to figure out what to do.
He was out of ___________ and thought he should just turn himself in to the sheriff.
So h e ____________ his long beard and dyed his hair so no one would recognize him.
I had to __________   the lawn in the old field yesterday.
So I knew that the right thing to do would be to ____________my crime to the authorities.
But since it was my birthday, he let me use it.
He didn’t even shave! He spent the daytime gambling with his mother’s money.
One day, his mother realized that her money was gone from her purse.
Hans went to live in the forest like an outlaw.
He went to a cottage to ask for a meal.
Hans liked the prospect of food and warmth, so he agreed.
When daylight faded, he returned to the cottage and went to sleep.
Hans went to the Aborigine’s cottage because he liked the prospect of working.
When daylight faded, Hans went to sleep under a tree.
The old man got very fierce when he realized Hans had been lazy.
At the beginning of the story, what did Hans do duringthe daytime?
Why did Hans’s mother ban him from her house? a.
How did Hans’s mother feel when Hans returned home? a.
A bundle is a number of things that are tied together.
I was shocked when he showed me a bundle o f money.
To flee means to run away from trouble or danger.
The crowd o f men tried to flee from the danger.
You have to turn the switch on to in itiate the computer system.
The lane passes directly in front o f our house.
Nerve is bravery or the belief that you can do something.
He has the nerve to think that he can actually wrestle with a lion.
An optimist is somebody who sees the good parts of a situation.
Even though he has physical problems, my brother is an optim ist.
A parade is a celebration when groups of people walk in the same direction.
To pave the ground is to lay material on it to make it easier to walk or drive on.
A scary phantom appeared from out o f the darkness.
Something that is portable is able to be moved or carried easily.
To scratch is to make small cuts with a claw or fingernail.
A symphony is a long piece of music performed by many musicians.
Alex, a violin player, has always dreamt o f playing a symphony.
PZ^ EfiJ E Choose the right definition for the given word.
Choose the word that is a better fit for each blank.
The band was almost ready to perform th e ___________
After a few moments, they ___________ the thirty-m inute piece.
The large field was full of grass where the animals could knew h is___________ would be glad to live there.
My whole class was invited to walk in th e.
The woman bought a ____________ lamp that she could take with her on trips.
After a year, however, she had to buy a new ____________for the lamp.
The Bremen Town Musicians Larry the cow, Harry the rooster and Lester the duck lived on a widow’s farm.
One day, the widow went to the lawn where her herd of cattle was grazing.
Larry wanted to flee, but he didn’t have the nerve to go by himself.
We’ ll go with you, and we can perform our symphony.
The animals put together a small bundle that held a drum, a flute and a portable.
Then they took their baggage and initiated their long journey.
They were eating a large dinner and telling stories about their greed and the people they stole from.
He said, “ I th ink we can scare them away!” Soon, the animals came up with a plan.
Then Larry stood on two feet, and Lester flew to the top of his head.
EtM tf A Mark each statement T for true or F for false.
Larry, Harry and Lester were cattle on the widow Riley’s farm.
The animals fled because the widow wanted to kill the herd.
Larry, Harry and Lester wanted to go to Bremen to perform in a parade.
The animals initiated the journey with only a portable microphone and a drum in a bundle.
Where did the cattle graze at the beginning of the story?
How did Larry, Harry and Lester find out about the parade? a.
What were the greedy thieves doing when the animals arrived at the house? a.
What did the animals pretend to be in order to scare the thieves away? a.
Her consequent rash came after she touched the poison ivy.
To derive something from another source means to get it from that thing.
Red’s nickname was derived from the color o f her hair.
To drown is to die from not being able to breathe underwater.
He would have drowned i f  the sailors would not have rescued him.
To invade is to take over a place by force.
The enemy forces tried to invade our country through the air.
A lieutenant is a rank in the military or police, or a person with that rank.
The lieutenant was a good leader, and his soldiers respected him.
The merit of something or someone is their good qualities.
The actor received an award for his merits in the movie.
A navy is the part of a country’s military that fights at sea.
Polar relates to the cold places on Earth’s north and south ends.
Only a few people live in the Earth’s northern po lar region.
After I officially resigned from work, I said goodbye to my boss.
Some people feel so sad that they think suicide is the only answer.
To travel via something means to travel through or using something.
We arrived in the city from the a irport via the train.
PZMS'u’ A Choose the right word for the given definition.
PiGMT B Choose the right definition for the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
We only require that you donate a small portion of your weekly earnings to our cause.
The massive empire that involved one family ruled for over 2,000 years.
The thin lines of sunlight warmed the small room and made it comfortable.
The unreal situation fooled many people into thinking that it was real.
The scent of her perfume passed quickly from person to person through the room.
After hearing about the new policy, Mitch was so upset that he quit his position.
The thin layer of ice covered the ground and the windows.
I was a low ranking officer after graduating from the military academy.
The sun’s rays don’t shine there for three whole months.
As a result, it ’s covered with snow, ice and frost.
Then how was the name derived? It started with a Viking named Erik the Red.
However, he was married to the niece of a very powerful man.
One day, Erik fought with his neighbor and killed him.
But only a fraction of the people in Iceland believed them.
His marine knowledge was good, but the trip was hard.
Not even the best navy could invade the new land.
Erik’s plan worked Within two years, over a thousand people moved to Greenland.
In the end, Greenland got its name all because of a trick.
Erik the Red wanted to start a dynasty in his name in Iceland.
The ice around Greenland protected it from being invaded by navies.
All of the following happened to people on Erik’s ship EXCEPT.
What did Erik think he was looking at when he first saw Greenland? a.
Why did Erik want to bring more people to Greenland? a.
To alter something means to make a small change to it.
I altered the color o f my nails to match my hair.
The tree collapsed righ t in front o f our house.
To curve is to move in a line that bends and does not go straight.
The road curves to the left and to the right.
After running all day, Greg’s feet had a disgusting odor.
A drain is a pipe that carries away water from a building, such as in a kitchen.
The water in the sink goes down the drain as you wash your hands.
When they saw each other again, the happy couple embraced.
Fireworks are objects that create colored lights when they are lit.
Flour is a powder made from plants that is used to make foods like bread.
A fuse is a string that you light on fireworks to make them explode.
The boy lit  the fuse on the rocket and waited fo r it  to burst in the sky.
Ginger is a spice from the root of a plant.
Ginger is a common ingredient in many dishes from India.
Ifyou are jealous, you th ink someone might take something from you.
Miriam was jealous because Sue was paying too much attention to jim.
A receipt is a paper that proves that something was received or bought.
After looking at my receipt, I realized that I had spent too much money.
To wipe something is to slide a piece of cloth over it to clean it.
Circle two words tha t are related in the group.
Exercise 2 Write a word tha t is s im ilar in meaning to the underlined part.
The mixture was a funny color and looked very unpleasant.
After the house fell down suddenly, the family built a new home somewhere else.
When the boy spilled his milk, his mother rubbed a cloth over it.
The bird moved in a line that was not straight through the sky.
The mother hugged the crying child to make her feel better.
The farmer’s food was usually ready in the season before winter.
She made small changes to her drawing before giving it to her friend.
The pipe that carries water away was clogged with hair.
I asked the taxi driver to give me a document that proved how much I paid.
Exercise 3 Choose the word tha t is a better f it  for each blank.
The roof o fthe  old house hadn’t been___________ since it was built.
Then____________ all o fthe ingredients together and put it overthe meat.
Last___________ , my neighbor’s parents gave him a toy rocket to put together.
He was sure that he just needed to fix th e ____________on it.
The store let me exchange them since I had m y___________
At the end o fthe  festival, there were supposed to b e ___________
However, they didn’t work because something had damaged th e ___________
Annie bought a type of paint that was a th ick___________
It was easy to use, and when she was done, she____________it up with an old cloth.
As a result, the team won the game a nd____________each other in happiness.
All they did was talk about ___________ things like frogs and snakes.
As a result, she poured the mixture down th e ____________and tried again.
Everyone is Special When I was young, everything that went wrong in my house seemed to be my fault.
They blended flour and ginger and made a disgusting paste.
Then they tried to wash it down the drain, but it got all over the floor.
Later, my brothers said that I did it and I had to wipe it up.
I worried that my parents liked them more than me.
One autumn day, I was sure I would make my parents proud.
After I put it together, I invited everybody to watch it.
We stood aside as it curved through the lawn and ran straight into the mailbox.
A few minutes later, my mom asked, “ Are you OK?”
I just wanted them to be jealous of me for once.
Now I know that my parents love me just as much as my brothers.
The brothers blended flour and ginger together when trying to make a disgusting paste.
The family stood aside on an autumn day to watch the girl launch her rocket.
The mailbox is crushed because the rocket curves into it.
The girl wanted her brothers to be jealous of her.
The mother embraces the girl and says she doesn’t love any of her children more than the others.
All o fthe  following happened when the brothers tried to cook EXCEPT.
The girl thought that putting together the model rocket proved her.
Why does her brother say that he hopes she kept the receipt? a.
The mother tells the girl that her children are like her fingers because.
An ambassador is a government worker who works in another country.
The ambassador from Korea was in charge o fthe  conference.
To exaggerate is to say that something is bigger or better than it really is.
Jimmy wasn’t exaggerating about the seriousness o f his injury.
Meanwhile means until something happens or while something is happening.
He wants to be a doctor in the future, but meanwhile, he works a regularjol.
A necklace is a piece of jewelry that people wear around their necks.
Joyce received a lovely pearl necklace for her wedding anniversary.
In a desert, water can be more precious than money.
A prejudice is an unfair opinion about someone before you get to know them.
A rumor is a story that may not be true.
A sin is something that is wrong for religious reasons.
Taking something that doesn’t belong to you is a sin.
Soup is a common food that is often sold in tin cans.
P/Mu’ A Choose the right word for the given definition.
P/a\Q1D’ B Choose the right definition for the given word.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The person who works for the government is from the UK but works in China.
The piece of jewelry worn around the neck was made of pure gold.
She admired the very valuable ring that her mother wore.
Would you please place one on top o fthe  other the boxes?
You shouldn’t spread things that may not be true about people.
Some visitors to foreign countries experience unfair judgment, but most have pleasant experiences.
Pizarro and the Inca Gold According to rumors, there’s lots of precious gold hidden in the jungles of Peru.
The Incas believed that their leader, Atahualpa, was both a king and a god.
But Atahualpa was a kind man and didn’t want to fight the Spaniards.
He said, “ If I give you a room full of gold, will you leave my country in peace?”
But a few days later, Pizarro returned to the Inca palace with his ambassadors.
But after seeing the gold, he wanted all of Peru’s gold.
The Spanish soldiers stayed in Peru and grabbed all the gold they could find.
They mixed the gold with tin so that it was poor quality.
They stuffed it into sacks and dragged it deep into the jungle.
Atahualpa offered Pizarro a room filled with stacks of precious gold.
Pizarro thought that Atahualpa had insulted his heritage and that his men held prejudices against the Incas.
Pizarro agreed that Atahualpa was both a god and a king.
There is a lot of gold in the Peruvian jungle, d.
Who went to the room of gold with Pizarro? a.
If something is arctic, it is from far north near the North Pole.
A canal is a path for water to travel through.
My mother is a successful chemist who helps invent new products.
I descended the stairs to get out o fthe  building.
An institution is an organization that works to help a city or group of people.
Banks are vital institutions that businesses and people use every day.
To poke something is to push it with your finger.
To postpone something is to make it happen later than planned.
If people are stubborn, they don’t change their minds easily.
A suburb is a small part of a large city.
I grew up in the suburbs only a few minutes outside o fthe  city.
The tide is the level o fthe  water in the sea.
The tide continued to crawl upon the beach little  by little.
It was a tragedy when his house was struck by lightning and burned.
Exercise 2 Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The party was planned for tonight, but it was moved to a later tim e.
I was recently elected to the group of people who make laws in a government.
The scientist who works with chemicals created a new formula for health.
The foods made from milk section is in the back of the supermarket.
She lives in the small parts o fthe  large city.
The level o fthe  water in the sea rises and falls every day.
The Boy Who Saved the Town Marcus lived in a small suburb near the sea.
His father worked as a chemist for an institution and wanted Marcus to get a job there.
One day, Marcus was jogging down the street with a gallon of milk to give to a merchant.
A wall there kept water from coming into the town during high tide.
Marcus knew that if the wall broke, it would be a tragedy for the town.
He had to choose between helping himself and helping the town.
It seemed crazy to him, but it was the only thing he could do.
This d idn’t fix the problem forever, but it did postpone the tragedy.
He felt the chill ofthe  arctic water as it splashed him.
He knew he had to wait until the tide descended.
It was very difficult, but Marcus stayed there and saved the town.
Once the tide had descended, Marcus told everyone what happened.
The local congress even gave him a gift for saving the town.
The chill o fthe  arctic water made Marcus take his finger out o fthe  wall.
Marcus didn’t want to be late taking the milk to the merchant.
Why was Marcus jogging down the street with a gallon of milk?
He had to make it home before the tide descended.
Why did Marcus hesitate to poke his finger into the wall? a.
He didn’t know who to save, himself or the town.
A bomb is an object that explodes and destroys large areas.
A certificate is a document that says that something is true or happened.
I was given a certificate after completing the computer course.
A circumstance is an event that makes a situation what it is.
There were many circumstances behind their success like hard work.
A coffin is a box used to bury dead people.
When a person passes away, they are usually buried inside o f a coffin.
To frown is to make an unhappy look with your face.
Melissa frowned when she found out that the party had been cancelled.
To gaze at something means to look at it for a long time.
We used a telescope to gaze at the stars fo r over an hour.
To glance at something means to look at it quickly.
She glanced behind her to see i f  he was looking at her.
Grief is the feeling of deep sadness, usually when a person dies.
The g rie f caused by losing her parents was very d ifficu lt for her.
A groom is a man who is going to be married.
The groom looked happy as he walked with his new wife.
A license is an official document that gives one permission to do something.
In the United States you need a driver’s license to drive legally.
A microscope is a device that makes small objects look bigger.
When something is nuclear, it relates to the division or joining of atoms.
To portray something means to describe it or show it in a picture.
Her picture portrayed the house she grew up in when she was little.
A souven iris  somethingyou buy to remind you o fa  place or event.
I bought a Russian doll as a souvenir from my trip to Moscow.
To trace something means to follow over it with the eyes or a finger.
I w ill take a better look at it when I get home.
The entire family was filled with lowered into the ground.
Tony____________at the pictures o fthe  new forms of bacteria that were discovered.
Curious, he viewed samples of them through a pow erfu l.
An Interesting Life A man looked through some boxes with his grandson.
He wished to share the circumstances behind each event with his grandson.
The boy couldn’t read it, but he traced his finger over paper.
The grandfather explained that the picture o fthe  coffins was taken after a nuclear bomb devastated a city.
The first photo the grandson gazed at was of a submarine.
The toy microscope was a souvenir from a science museum.
The certificate was from the day the grandson was born.
The groom and bride in the last photo were happy.
What did the grandfather say he did during the war? a.
How did the grandson feel at first about the circumstances behind each photograph? a.
All o fthe  following are true about the toy microscope EXCEPT.
She filled  the basin with water and washed her face.
A broom is a brush with a long handle used for cleaning floors.
My father usually uses a broom to sweep away dust in the basement.
A caterpillar is a small insect that looks like a worm and eats plants.
After eating a lo t o f leaves, caterpillars change into butterflies.
A handicap is a condition that lim its someone’s mental or physical abilities.
Joe has a s ligh t handicap, so he uses a walker to get around.
A hook is a sharp curved piece of metal used for catching or holding things.
An appliance is a piece of equipment used for jobs in the home.
To pursue someone or something is to chase or follow them.
If someone is reluctant, they do not want to do something.
Sleeves are the part of a shirt where your arms go.
Ryan bought a new sh irt with long sleeves to keep his arms warm.
The spine is the bone that runs up and down the middle o fthe  back.
Our spine helps us to stand up nice and straight.
A stain is a dirty mark that is d ifficult to clean.
He had a red stain on the collar o f his shirt.
A strip is a long, narrow piece of material or land.
He had long strips o f film  that held images o f his trip abroad.
To utilize something means to use it for a specific purpose.
They utilized a pa ir o f scissors to cut the ribbon.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Some animals, such as insects, do not have a bone in the middle o fthe  back.
John filled the bowl for washing things with water so he could wash his face.
She was hungry so she looked for a snack in the furniture where food is kept.
The swimmer came out o f the dirty river covered in dark brown water.
Mary put her flowers in a pot and then hung it from a curved piece of metal.
The insect that looks like a worm eats the leaves on a tree.
William used a long, narrow piece of cloth to tie the sticks together.
The baseball player rolled up the pieces of material that cover his arms so they wouldn’t get dirty.
We tried using soap and hot water but couldn’t get the dirty mark out of my jacket.
The Kitten and the Caterpillar Katie the kitten liked to play.
One day, Cory the caterpillar emerged from a hole in.
Cory ran into the kitchen and into the cupboard, but Katie chased closely behind.
Plates fell into the sink and broke in the basin.
Her paws left stains on the cloth, and her claws ripped the sleeves into strips.
He utilized a small crack in the floor to hide.
He moved his body as far into the hole as possible.
He didn’t know how he’d get out o fthe  hole.
Cory was safe, and Katie was left outside because she didn’t listen to the wishes of.
Cory hopped off the counter and ran into the cupboard.
Which is NOT a reason that Cory was reluctant about playing with Katie?
Where was Katie playing when Cory emerged from the wall? a.
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
Introduction About the Vocabulary The 600 words in each book of this series along with the additional target words presented in the appendices included in the first three books of the series are the most useful words in English.
They were found by analysis of a collection of English course books from various levels in the primary, secondary and tertiary school systems.
The words included in this series were chosen because they occurred many times in different levels of these materials.
Because of the way that they were chosen, these words have the following characteristics:
No matter what English course you are studying, the words in these books will be of value to you.
This means that the effort in learning the words is well repaid by the number of times learners have a chance to encounter or use them.
These books as a whole cover a large proportion of the words in any spoken or written text.
They also cover at least 90% of the words in conversation.
About the Books The activities in these books are specially designed to make use of important learning conditions.
Firstly, the words are introduced using sentence definitions and an example sentence.
The activities that follow in the units encourage learners to recall the meanings and forms of the words.
Some activities also make the learners think about the meaning of the words in the context of a sentence— a sentence different from the sentences that occurred in the introduction of the words.
Moreover, each unit ends with a story containing the target words.
While reading the story, the learners have to recall the meanings of the words and suit them to the context of the story.
Such activities help learners develop a better understanding of a common meaning for a given word which fits the different uses.
Illustrations for each target word are provided to help learners visualize the word as it is being used in the example sentence.
These word/image associations aim to help students grasp the meaning of the word as well as recall the word later.
It should be noted that words have more than one grammatical category.
However, this series focuses on the word’s most common form.
This is mentioned to remind learners that just because a word is labeled and utilized as a noun in this series does not mean that it can never be used in another form such as an adjective.
This series has simply focused on the word in the form that it is most likely to be expressed.
Supporting Learning with Outside Activities A well-balanced language course provides four major opportunities for learning: learning through input, learning through output, deliberate learning, and fluency development.
The highly structured activities in these books support all four types of learning opportunities.
In addition, learning can further be supported through the following activities:
Have students create vocabulary cards with one word from the unit on one side of the card and the translation of the word in the student’s first language on the other side.
Students should use the cards for study in free moments during the day.
Over several weeks, students will find that quick repeated studying for brief periods of time is more effective than studying for hours at one sitting.
Reading such books provides both enjoyment as well as meaning-focused input which will help the words stick in students’ memory.
Practice reading fluency to promote faster recall of word meaning for both sight recognition and usage.
Compass Publishing’s Reading for Speed and Fluency is a good resource for reading fluency material.
Reinforcement of the high-frequency vocabulary presented in this series is important across all the four language skills.
His specialist interests are language teaching methodology and vocabulary learning.
To consist of is to be made of parts or things.
Today’s choices for lunch consisted of pizza, hamburgers, and hot dogs.
A household is all the people who live in one house.
Our household is made up of my father, my mother and me.
The pace of something is the speed at which it happens.
I ran the race at a slower pace than my friend.
Check (a/ ) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
It is hard to seek for things when it is sunny.
If you work at a fast pace, things will get done quickly.
It is important to lift your notes before a test.
People are eager to leave when they don’t want to go anywhere.
Some people live in the landscape while others live in the city.
It is good to seek advice when you have a problem.
Polite people do not say “please” or “thank you.” b.
When you spill something, you should clean it up right away.
The Twelve Months An awful woman lived with her daughter and stepdaughter in her household.
She walked at a slow pace because of the snow.
One of the man said they were the twelve months and that they would help Anna.
January walked to her and made a motion with his hand.
The days of the month passed rapidly until it was February’s turn.
Then March made the sun shine and flowers grew in the field.
Anna loaded her basket with so many flowers that she could hardly lift it.
Then she gave a quick but polite “thank you” to the twelve men and returned home.
She was very eager to show her stepmother all the flowers.
Back at the house, she spilled the flowers onto the table.
Anna’s stepmother and stepsister went to seek the twelve months.
How a girl made the sun shine in winter c.
Anna asked the months to live in her household c.
Anna’s awful stepmother and stepsister never found the months d.
Anna got lost going across the dark landscape on her way home.
According to the passage, all the following are true EXCEPT_______ a.
Anna wasn’t anxious to go out in the cold, dark night.
What was Anna’s stepmother’s and stepsister’s intent when they left?
A castle is a building with strong walls where royalty usually lives.
To command someone is to tell them to do something.
To counsel someone is to listen and give advice about a problem.
A monster is any imaginary frightening creature that looks strange.
If something is remote, it is very far away and difficult to get to.
It took many days to get to the remote island.
A weed is a plant, especially one that is not useful or wanted.
The yard of the house was full of ugly weeds.
A wing is the part of an animal that lets it fly.
The bird used its wings to fly across the water.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The fire made the water turn into hot misty air, st______
The teacher told me to listen to and foUow his rules, s ___________ to.
Go to the higher part of the building and clean the windows, u.
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
When I counsel you, I am trying to help you.
It takes a long time to get to remote places.
The people were happy when the monster was elected president.
I forgot to bring my camera when I went on vacation.
If I command you to work, then I want you to work.
If you don’t keep your yard clean, weeds will grow.
The explosion in the sky was caused by the fireworks.
The Dragon An evil dragon lived in a castle in the remote southern mountains.
The people sent a boy to ask for help from a wise old man.
The boy traveled for many days to find the castle.
He went to the upper level and opened a door.
Then, he took the dragon’s gold and jewelry and returned to his town.
How did the dragon turn the people into statues? a.
According to the passage, all of the following are true EXCEPT a.
How did the boy ensure that the dragon would not smell him?
When people are brave, they are not afraid to face pain or danger.
The brave firefighter saved the girl from the burning building.
A chief is the leader of a group of people.
If something hardly happens, it almost does not happen at all.
I hardly saw the concert since I had to leave early.
Laughter is the sound produced by laughing about something funny.
To secure something means to get it after a lot of effort.
I was able to secure a good grade on my test after weeks of studying.
When someone or something is steady, they are under control.
The problem was hard but she remained steady and solved it.
Choose the word that is a better fit for each sentence.
If our country’s army is weak, our_______________ might attack us.
I _______________ to go to the store, but I didn’t have time.
The rain was a _______________ for the other soccer team.
Write the word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
He lost the fight because his object used for hurting people was broken, wea______
The long, straight stick with a pointed end hit the center of the target.
The little boy was not afraid to look under his bed for the monster, b________
Johan was afraid of heights, but he remained under control and finished the climb.
If we don’t stop for gas soon, the car will run out.
They were going to lose unless they could secure a small entrance.
The chief and his men got ready for the battle.
Soon, long lines of the enemy’s army twisted around the hills.
He knew that his men’s weapons and skills were better.
The arrows stuck into the shields but did not hurt any of the men.
Then the enemy’s soldiers attacked the Spartans with long spears.
Though they hardly slept at all, the chief and his men remained steady.
But the enemy found a way to beat the Spartans.
Even though they lost, the Battle ofThermopylae is one of the most famous battles in history.
Spartan - a soldier from the city of Sparta in Greece.
How a small disadvantaged army nearly beat a large military d.
Why was the smaller army not afraid of the larger one? a.
Why did the soldiers do whatever their chief asked of them?
The chest is the front part of a person’s body under the neck.
The water in the lake was as high as my chest.
If you have confidence about something, you are sure of it.
I have confidence that I did well on the test.
A consequence is a result of a choice or action.
Asa consequence of missing my bus, I had to find another way to work.
He was able to impress the girls with his new dance.
A marathon is a very long foot race just over 42 kilometers.
I ran a marathon, and now my legs are tired.
The bridge is too narrow for a car to drive over.
When something is rough, it is not even or smooth.
I felt a sense of terror when the tiger chased me.
A victim is a person that had something bad happen to them.
Choose the word that is a better fit for each sentence.
His bad grade was a ______________ of not studying for the test.
The bumpy frog’s skin was very_____ The man wore a coat because he was to cold air.
Check (V ) the sentence with bolded word that makes better sense.
It was a disaster when the students did well on the test.
My mother made a threat of giving me ice cream.
If you win a prize, then you are a victim.
It’s a marathon from my front door to my bedroom.
When the girl did not know what to do, she had confidence.
He did not want to be a victim, so he ran into the forest.
His pale brown hooves were hard, so they were not sensitive to rough rocks.
However, his horns got caught in branches, slowing him down.
In the end, the deer escaped the threat of the dog.
That was almost a disaster! I almost did not escape because of my chest and horns.
What can we infer by the end of the story? a.
According to the passage, all the following are true EXCEPT a.
What happened to the deer’s horns when he ran away?
A boot is a heavy shoe that goes over your ankle.
He wore boots so that his feet wouldn’t get wet.
The postcard had a pretty green border of pine needles.
A frame is a border for a picture or mirror.
I have to get a frame for my friend’s picture.
If someone or something is incredible, it is hard to believe they are true.
I have an incredible story to tell you about my vacation.
There is a well-known legend about a king and his queen.
To praise is to show that you like someone or something.
If someone or something is silent, they make no sound.
To surround something is to close in on it from all sides.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
For school, I have to learn about a family member from the past, an ance________
Have you heard the story from the past of Robin Hood? le_
The lake was filled with clear and beautiful blue water.
May 29,1953 Today is the most important day of my life.
I was the senior explorer in my group, and I knew we needed proof of our climb.
From that angle, I saw the border of the clouds touch the rocks below.
Thousands of years ago, my ancestors saw the world this way.
After fifteen minutes, I knew it was time to proceed down the mountain.
I sent messages to my relatives to tell them that I was safe.
But it was hard to leave the mountain so quickly.
What did Hillary see from the angle over the side of the mountaintop? a.
Hillary was happy to do all of the following EXCEPT__________ a.
According to the passage, the air at the top of the mountain was a.
If something is brief, it only lasts fora short time.
I will dive into the lake once we get there.
To exchange means to give something for another thing in return.
A favor is something you do for someone to help them.
Can you do me a favor and turn off the lights?
If something lasts forever, it means it lasts for all time.
The young couple promised that they would love each other forever.
A guy is an informal way to call a man.
The guy at the flower shop was really helpful today.
If people or things are lovely, they are good-looking or beautiful.
Youth is a time in people’s lives when they are young.
My mother wanted to be a nurse in her youth.
I’ll be able to play you a song soon She needed help, so________________
Jack protested that he wanted to go to the mall b.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The police try to catch the man who took the money, ch______
We saw a royal home while we were in France, pal______
What was the cost you had to pay to see the concert? f____
My dream is to go to a different country for a year.
The Frog Prince A lovely princess sat by the pool and played with a sculpture of a bear.
I want to sleep in your bed, and you must kiss me in.
The frog dove for a brief moment and got the sculpture.
In my youth, I angered a tribe of cruel witches, who turned me into.
How people are not always what they seem to be c.
Why princes should go abroad to find a bride d.
The princess was humiliated when the prince didn’t take her back to his.
The prince and princess were only happy for a brief time.
The frog protested he didn’t need gold because he was rich.
The prince was turned into a frog during his youth.
According to the passage, all of the following are true EXCEPT____________ a.
Why did the princess think she would not have to keep her promise?
To fascinate someone is to make them really like something.
You use nevertheless to show that something goes against a fact.
To persuade someone is to make them agree to do something.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
Linda was happy that she had good people at work, col_______________
Our country used to have one other country under our control, col______
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
Scholars can teach you many things that you didn’t know.
Some people like to live in cities, while others like to live in ruins.
Most people fly on a plane when they go overseas.
You should watch factual movies if you want to laugh.
Many people feel happy when they depart on a trip.
If you travel overseas, you are still in the same country.
Some people like to visit ruins to learn about the past.
You should see a scholar if you don’t want to do your homework.
I tried to persuade my friends to meet me for lunch today.
If you study biology, you will learn about different animals.
If you depart late, you can get to school early.
People who like to know the truth like factual stories.
One day he met a sailor from a colony overseas.
They debated with him: no one thought a bird could talk.
He tried to persuade them, but they laughed at him.
The sailor he had met told him to look for a man named Jai, who would be able to help him in his search.
Norton could not find the bird, and this depressed him.
On the route back, he walked past some old ruins.
He wanted to depart from his colleagues and start a new life.
He was on a mission to find the talking bird.
At the end of the story, we can infer that____________
According to the passage, all the following are true EXCEPT a.
To concentrate on someone or something is to give your full attention.
I could not concentrate on my homework because the room was so loud.
A destination is the place where someone or something is going to.
The edge of something is the part of it that is farthest from the center.
A path is a way from one place to another that people can walk along.
To resort to something is to depend on it in order to solve a problem.
I hope they don’t resort to violence to end the argument.
A valley is a low area of land between two mountains or hills.
We looked at the valley below from the top of the mountain.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
He wants to win so much that he will not obey the rules to do it.
I’m going to stand in the dark area of the tree because the sun is too hot here.
The police believe it’s true that the clerk stole the money, sus________
If we do what we are trying to do, we will become very rich! sue________
Please read aloud the questions so the students can write them down, di___________
I am sure I can do something because I have practiced for years, conf___________
After seeing the evidence, you must decide if the man is innocent, con___________
It was a good feeling knowing that I had saved enough money to go on a trip, de___________
The large size of the box made it difficult to move, con _
Tricky Turtle Ricky the rabbit and Tera the turtle met by the edge of the river.
They looked exactly the same! Then, her family members hid in shadows on the path.
However, Tera’s brother hid behind a bush in the valley below.
He looked just like Tera! Ricky ran as fast as he could along the path.
But, to him, it seemed like Tera was always ahead.
He reached the top, but Tera’s sister was already there.
He had been tricked by a family of slow turtles.
A turtle with a crazy idea and a broad family.
Because Ricky the rabbit said no one was capable of beating him b.
Because she thought that the path of the race was too difficult c.
Because her family wouldn’t gather when she asked them to.
She said the race would take a considerable amount of energy.
A capital is an important city where a country’s leaders live and work.
Ne will visit the capital to learn about our government.
Destruction is damage to something so bad that it can’t be fixed.
After the big fire, there was much destruction in the city.
A division is the act of making smaller groups out of a larger one.
The chart had six divisions which all had different colors.
To frustrate is to prevent someone from fulfilling their desire.
The machine frustrated me because I could not fix it.
To govern is to control the public business of a country, state, or city.
Royal describes something that belongs to a king or queen.
A slave is a person who is not free and must work for someone else.
He said something stupid that made everyone angry at him.
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
If you aid someone, he or she will usually thankyou.
If you cooperate with your friends, you will feel lonely.
Circle the two words that are opposites in each group.
Long ago, there was a clever man by the name of Bartelby O’Boyle.
As a boy, he was kept as a slave by the royal family.
He saw other children play, but he always had to work.
But he was not stupid, and he wanted to change things.
Then one day there was a struggle for authority in the kingdom.
There was a division of the people, and one group fought against another group to see which would govern the kingdom.
Many people had nothing to eat; Bartelby decided to aid them.
Then, he gave Gilliam some food to relieve his hunger.
They took food from the rich ve it to the poor.
Because of this, Bartleby gained a reputation across the kingdom.
Even today, many people admire him for helping the poor.
According to the passage, all the following are true EXCEPT a.
A citizen is someone who lives in a certain town or city.
A council is a group of people who run a city or town.
The council met to discuss the new laws for the city.
When people or things are enormous, they are very large.
A funeral is a ceremony that takes place after a person dies.
They had a funeral for the soldier who died during the war.
If someone ought to do something, then it is the right thing to do.
She told her two friends about the wild tale of her day.
To trap people or animals is to capture them so they cannot get away.
The man was put into jail because he was violent.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The group of people who run the town voted on whether we needed a new park.
The ceremony for the dead person was attended by many family and friends, fun________
The thief wanted to tell his story during the test to decide if he was guilty.
I really should do the right thing and go home and feed the cat.
The rain and thick clouds on the ground made it hard to see.
On my first night, there was a thick fog over the water.
His name was Blackbeard, and he was one of the most violent pirates ever.
Then he declared, “You give me medicine!” Blackbeard wanted the medicine for some of the sick pirates on his ship.
So the town’s council decided to give him the medicine.
He didn’t want to go to jail, so he quit being a pirate.
They attacked him while he was fishing on his boat.
But people still tell tales about him many years later.
The fog was too thick for ships to sail in.
Harold loved watching the stars, so he decided to study astronomy.
To blame someone for something bad is to say they did it.
In chemistry class, the professor taught us about chemical reactions.
A dinosaur is a very big animal that lived millions of years ago.
I like to see the dinosaur bones at the museum.
He had fame and fortune, but he was not happy.
A forecast is an idea about what the weather will be like in the future.
A principal is a person in charge of a school.
My school’s principal can be very strict with the rules.
A shelf is a place on a wall where you put things.
I keep my clothes on a shelf in my closet.
If you do something out of spite, you want to be mean.
He snuck into his sister’s room and stole her bag out of spite.
Since my dog was wet, he tried to shake all the water off his body.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The idea about tomorrow’s weather doesn’t look good for our outdoor plans, for________
Look at how the vegetables are all planted in a line, r____
I would like to see that interesting display on birds, exh________
My brother likes big animals that lived millions of years ago, din_____________
If you are not careful, you will get water all over yourself, w ____
Permission to enter into the private club is rarely given, ad_______________
Will the school offer a study of stars class next year? a _________________
The head of the school decided that all students should wear uniforms, pri_____________
Check (a / ) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
It was very kind of him to spite his sister.
He drank all the milk in the fridge to spite me.
Joyner is a strict principal, but she is actually very nice.
Exercise 3 Choose the word that is a better fit for each sentence.
Also, the forecast called for rain and that would affect baseball practice.
Suddenly, his mother yelled, “Take out the garbage right now!” When Carl returned from taking the garbage outside, he was all wet.
He put his umbrella on the shelf and sat in the third row.
But the teacher asked why Carl’s umbrella was on the floor.
But she sent him to the principal out of spite.
What if it were real? He saw it in his mind.
Carl’s class said he was a genius for having a dinosaur.
It could interfere with math class, too! Soon, Carl’s fame spread through school.
He taught his dinosaur to be very gentle and put it on exhibit.
But admission would only be given to those classmates who paid him a fee.
As he was dreaming in class, he hadn’t finished the test!
Do you think that Carl will have baseball practice after school? Why?
To convert something means to change it into something else.
The man converted his messy field into a garden of flowers.
Hiring more police officers has decreased crime in the city.
When someone is generous, they like to give things to people.
The generous man donated several new computers to our school.
An ingredient is something that is part of a food dish.
The main ingredients in cake are eggs, sugar and flour.
A mess is a condition that is not clean or neat.
Metal is a strong material people use to build things.
Steel is a common metal that is used to build buildings.
I have a small quantity of milk in my glass.
To sue someone is to take them to court for something wrong they did.
I sued the company after I slipped on a banana peel in their hallway.
The Mean Chef Once there was a chef, who was mean to his cooks.
Many people were not able to afford the cheapest bean dish.
When his metal oven broke, he did not have it fixed.
The only light was from candles, and the whole place was a mess.
He monitored the cooks and yelled if they did not do things his way.
One day, the cooks decided that they were tired of the abuse and that they would not be passive anymore.
Now, they controlled the restaurant! They decreased the price of food.
They used the best ingredients and made large quantities of food.
The chef realized that the restaurant’s problems were his fault.
The new, generous chef insisted on giving the customers a free meal.
How a mean chef was converted into a generous man b.
Why waiters’ funds are not enough to pay their debts d.
Why could people not afford to eat at the restaurant? a.
What did the chef learn at the end of the story? a.
It was his fault that the restaurant did so well.
Behaving in a nice way is better than being mean.
Why did the chef insist on giving his customers a free meal at the end of the story?
When someone has anxiety, they have a lot of worries and fear.
When I have to climb to high places, I’m filled with anxiety.
An army is a large group of people who fight in wars.
I guarantee that the sun will come up in the morning.
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
I should quit eating candy because it is bad for me.
I will need water if I’m going to hike the long trail.
If I want to get better at sports, I should quit playing.
The clouds look like they can touch the mountain peaks.
I have a great deal of pride when I lose a contest.
The boy was filled with pride when he learned how to read.
Choose the word that is a better fit for each sentence.
I had a feeling of___ when I thought the bully would hit me.
When the man stopped breathing, his wife knew it was an.
They began talking about how they get away from their enemies.
If I am in trouble, I can call them to lend their help.
This is proof that having a good plan is better than having many bad plans.
Why you need a good plan in an emergency d.
How foxes have the potential to make billions of plans.
Because his army of friends did not lend their help c.
Because he did not know what his initial move should be d.
Because he could not find a tree in which to carve a tiny hole.
Why was the cat full of pride at the end of the story? a.
According to the passage, all the following are true EXCEPT___ a.
I calculated how much money I would need to buy the car.
I will move into the dormitory at the beginning of the school year.
Physics is a science that deals with energy and how it affects things.
In physics class, we used Newton’s Cradle to learn about energy.
If something is severe, it is very bad or serious.
After hitting his hand with the hammer, Sam was in severe pain.
A uniform is a piece of clothing worn by people of the same group.
All the members of our marching band wear matching uniforms.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
It is easily seen that Elizabeth hates math class, obv________
My dad will tell me to remember to feed our dog, rem me.
Sitting out in the sun gave David a very serious burn, se________
I walked back to the school building where students live before class, d.
Exercise 3 Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
The Good Student Sue left her dormitory early that morning.
Sue was committed to learning, and she had a talent for getting good grades.
She composed a paper and found the perfect thesis about the importance of greenhouses.
Her face got hot, and her vision began to blur.
Sue still had a portion of the test to finish.
A few minutes later, the nurse came in with a glass of juice and told Sue they needed to chat.
When Sue got back to her room, she went right to bed.
A nurse reminding a student about her history paper b.
A girl who studies so much that she gets sick.
According to the passage, why did Sue stay up late the night before? a.
According to the passage, what was obvious to the nurse after seeing Sue? a.
As they chatted, what did the nurse say would cause Sue severe sickness?
He used a sponge to absorb the water on the floor.
A boss is a person in charge of other people at work.
To donate is to give something to a charity or organization.
To elevate something is to put it at a higher level.
The man elevated the picture so he could see it better.
A handle is the part of an object people hold while using it.
If you are cooking for more than two people,____ a.
The Lucky Knife I’ve devoted my life to studying past generations.
Our job was to find old treasures for a school’s history foundation.
I dined on many things that I had never tasted before.
We had been there about a month and hadn’t found anything.
It felt like it had doubled in weight because the ground had absorbed a lot of water.
It was an old knife! The handle felt smooth in my hand.
My uncle donated all of the things to a special committee.
A crew of committee workers digging in the mud d.
What is probably true of the teen in the story? a.
He had to elevate the knife to see what it was.
To deny something is to say it is not true.
The flu is a type of sickness that makes you feel weak or your body hurt.
To interrupt is to briefly stop someone when they are doing something.
My mother interrupted me when I was trying to listen to music.
To last is to continue or go on for an amount of time.
The man’s speech gave me a new perspective on our country.
It is hard to think in a rational way when you are scared.
To recover is to go back to normal after something bad happens.
I hope the city will recover soon after the flood.
To rely on something or someone is to trust or depend on them.
The boy relied on his older brother to help him.
To stare at something is to look at it for a long time.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The book was easy for me to read , ________________
Choose the word that is a better fit for each sentence.
I trusted the man, so I I could not depend on the man;
It shocked him to see a boy who had a strong likeness to him.
He thought he was going to freeze or get sick with a fever or the flu.
A student who’s too shy to talk to a prince c.
How two boys who bore a likeness to each other traded places d.
He liked to rely on the servants at the palace.
He was afraid he would freeze or get a fever or the flu.
What did the Prince miss when he was being Sam? a.
An aim is a goal someone wants to make happen.
Winning the game confirmed that James was a good player.
To criticize is to say you do not like someone or something.
To differ is to not be the same as another person or thing.
I differ from my brother: he is short, while I am tall.
An expense is the money that people spend on something.
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes the better sense.
It is a good idea to bet your money on silly things.
You should go to a mechanic if you have a problem with your car.
You should attach a stamp to a letter before you mail it.
If you and your date differ too much, you might not like each other.
When you confirm the results of the test, you make them better.
People must pay attention to signals when they are driving.
When you visit a mechanic they will sell you a new car.
You should wear nice clothing if you go to a formal event.
Husbands and wives who differ are often very busy people.
If you commute to work, you have to travel a certain distance.
It is a good idea to confirm your plans before you travel.
If you attach a large sign to your door, no one will see it.
If your aim is to learn how to swim, you must get in the water.
People who have an aim to succeed are very lazy.
I also had a sincere aim to make a car that anybody could buy.
Then, in 1908,1 introduced the Model-T in a formal ceremony.
It confirmed that I was right: it was possible to build a car my way!
One Model T could be put together in 93 minutes.
The prime reason for doing this was to save money.
People would buy cars to commute to work if the price was low enough.
How did the Model T change other car companies? a.
It created a signal for them to start making cheaper cars.
Ford was not of great height d.Tord’s father was sincere.
According to the passage, all the following are true EXCEPT___ a.
An element of something is a particular part of it.
Tackling an opponent is Johnny’s favorite element of American footbal.
When people have faith in something, they believe in it and trust it.
When my friend came over, I greeted him at the door.
To investigate means to search for something or learn about it.
To pause means to stop doing something for a while.
Since she was so hungry, she paused to make a snack.
I want to get involved in a _______________ where I am helping others.
Exercise 3 Circle two words that are related in each group.
When he got to the monks’ house, they greeted him and let him in.
He got a few ideas, and he did not want to delay any longer.
He also liked to write, so he started a diary.
He was interested in agriculture, so he planted some grains.
He made his own labels to put on the jars of jam.
It is not too hard to be happy after all.
All one has to do is find things they like doing, and do them!
Because he was convinced that he was a fine priest b.
Because he wanted to tell them how happy he became.
After the priest talked to the monks, what did he think about? a.
The girl was a fool for playing too close to the water.
A nest is a place where a bird lays its eggs.
The bird laid her eggs in the nest that she made.
A reception is a party to welcome a person or celebrate an event.
We all danced and had a good time at the wedding reception.
My father’s tone told me I had broken the rule.
I asked my mom if we could adopt it b.
I usually tell them how much better my country is than theirs b.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
The man was a for crossing the street without looking.
I like being alone in the forest because of the.
The boy who stole the bread me not to tell.
One morning, people from a small town found a little girl by a stream.
As the people got closer, they saw that the girl’s skin was green!
But she was able to interpret what the girl was trying to say.
Sometimes the girl drew pictures to illustrate what she meant.
The green girl was from a place far beyond the sun.
They only ate green leaves, which made their skin green.
She fed the green girl home-cooked meals, and soon the girl wasn’t green anymore.
The people had a huge reception to welcome her as a citizen of the town.
A girl who liked to find nests in the trees c.
What are the people trying to do to the green girl? a.
What is true of the green girl in the story? a.
She was good at drawing illustrating about what she meant.
To tell the girl that she was a fool b.
To exclaim that she didn’t want to adopt her d.
Why did the town judge speak in a worried tone?
Approximate means to be close to an exact amount, number or time.
The Great Wall was a barrier between China and its enemies.
A duty is something that a person has to do.
It is parents’ duty to take care of their children.
To insert something means to put it in something else.
A statistic is a number that tells a fact about something.
The statistics showed that we did just as well this year as last year.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The numbers that tells a fact show it is more dangerous to ride in a car than an airplane.
It makes me sad that so many people suffer having no money, pov________
I could not get past the thing that was in my wav, bar________
She does not have a dog, but she likes to make believe that she does.
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
When he says things wrong, he feels like a 4_________________
When I was a boy, I pretended to be a great scientist.
I loved school, but my life at home was hard.
My father lost his job, so my family lived in poverty.
I finished high school and went to college in Switzerland.
At first, other scientists did not approve of my work.
Rising to the rank of an admired scientist was a gradual process.
I showed how to find the approximate size of very big things, like stars.
I also detected and explained the movement of very small things, like atoms.
How Einstein got past barriers to accomplish many great things d.
Why Einstein pretended to be sick while in elementary school.
They were unhappy about new developments in math and statistics.
They couldn’t pay their rent in Germany and had to leave.
Why was Einstein’s rise in the ranks of scientists gradual? a.
An astronaut is a person that goes into outer space.
To float is to move on top of water without sinking.
To grant something is to allow someone to have it.
The teacher granted us a break after studying hard all day.
Gravity is the force that makes things fall to Earth.
To pour a liquid means to make it come out of a container.
Someone or something’s presence is the fact they are there.
If a material is raw, it is natural and has not been processed.
A satellite is something that is sent into space to get information.
Choose the word that is a better fit for each sentence.
The movie had_______________ flying in heaven and singing beautiful songs.
The teacher asked all of us to_______________ in writing the story.
Thomas got a broke, and now the street is flooded.
Exercise 3 Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
It was for a treasure hunt in some _________________ caves.
When I got to the hunt, there were a lot of other kids there.
My treasure turned out to be a book called Treasure Island.
Each night after work, he lay awake in an open field.
One day, he was given permission to participate in a mission to space.
An angel told him to stop working there and make his dreams come true.
When the students heard the fire alarm, they left the building.
An award is a prize someone gets for doing something well.
He got an award for having the best grades in class.
A breed is a group of animals within a species.
The girls had a contest to see who could jump higher.
To convict someone means to prove that they did a bad thing.
He was convicted of the crime and sent to jail.
A garage is the part of a house where people put their cars.
My car does not get dirty because I keep it in the garage.
To resume something means to start it again after taking a break.
To rob a person or place is to take their property by using force.
A tissue is a soft piece of paper people use to wipe their noses.
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
The award for winning the game is a new toy.
I won the contest because I was the fastest runner.
They were going to race from the barn to the farmer’s garage.
The winner qualified to win a bag full of apples as an award.
The cart with all the apples was not stable, and the animals had to repair it.
The pig yelled, “We are going to slip! We must clean up this mess.” The pup felt bad, and she began to cry.
The dog gave her a tissue to wipe her tears.
But the duck tried to rob them and take all the apples.
The cat said, “ I will have you arrested!” The duck said, “You can’t convict me! You can’t prove I took it.” The race stopped yet again.
There was a fire! They got buckets of water to put out the fire.
A journalist came to write a story about the festival and the race.
I would have won the race easily.” The pig said, “ It was somewhat hard to have the race.
How a special breed of racehorse would’ve won the race c.
Why animals have to repair things on a farm d.
When the cart with the apples fell over, why did the animals stop running? a.
Because they did not want to slip on the apples b.
Because they did not want to resume the race d.
He was arrested and convicted of stealing a bag of money.
According to the passage, all the following are true EXCEPT a.
If two things or people are alike, they are similar in some way.
The flies buzzing around John’s head annoyed him very much.
If something is artificial, it is made to look like something natural.
That soccer field has artificial grass, but it looks real.
If something is distinct, it is easily noticed or different from other things.
Dust is very tiny pieces of dirt or other matter.
In the old house, the dust was thick on the floor and chairs.
Excitement means to feel a lot of happiness about something.
Did you see the excitement in her when the team scored?
After my broken arm heals, I can play baseball again.
To inherit is to get something from someone who has died.
His manner of not looking at someone while speaking, is a bit rude.
If something is solid, it is made of firm material.
Choose the word that is a better fit for each sentence.
Because they had plastic leaves, the flowers were clearly _ Though they were made in different years, those cars look.
I couldn’t _______________ which of the black bags was mine.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The lawyer said that Jane would be given her uncle’s house after he died, inhe______
The police thought my brother was a person who steals, thi____
The wind blew the tiny pieces of dirt along the street, d______
Tom used a series of connected loops to pull his truck, ch______
The bandages helped the cut on his arm to become well after injury, h ______
The fall left a painful injury to my left leg.
Their excitement continued to grow stronger as they talked about the vacation.
Therefore, he had a large tomb built for himself and his riches.
Most of the stones were solid, but he put one special stone on the roof.
When the tomb was done, the king moved in his stock of gold.
Because all the stones looked alike, he had left a distinct mark on the artificial block.
The mark helped him distinguish the difference in the architecture.
At last he hired a guard to hide inside the tomb.
When the builder entered the tomb, the guard wounded him.
When the builder healed, he explained to the king that he didn’t keep any of the gold.
The manner in which a king inherited his riches b.
What distinguished the artificial block from the real blocks? a.
How did the king know his gold was missing? a.
After playing in the dirt, the boy took a bath.
To bend is to move something so it is not straight.
Lee bent over and picked up the paper on the ground.
To chew is to move your mouth to break up food.
When a person is disabled, they cannot do what a normal person can do.
A flag is a piece of colored cloth that represents something.
A journal is a type of magazine that deals with an academic subject.
Mi-young was busy working on an article for an art journal.
A liquid is a substance that is neither solid nor gas.
To marvel at something is to feel surprise and interest in it.
A nutrient is something that a living thing needs to keep it alive.
Some people believe that the soul lives after the body dies.
After eating a sufficient amount of food, I left the table.
What do you think we need for our classroom? a.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
I don’t want to have to regret making a mistake.
One day, James was walking and inspecting a patient’s file.
Steve said, “ I have to leave, but here’s some fiction to read.”
What does James notice now that he isn’t busy? a.
What does James do when he leaves the hospital? a.
To admit something means to say that it is true.
A bowl is a deep, round dish that holds food or liquid.
Mom brought home a dozen donuts for us as a treat.
To inspire means to make a person want to do something.
I was inspired to write a poem after watching the sunrise.
If something is neat, it is very clean or organized well.
Her graduation was an occasion to have a good time.
A penalty is a punishment, given when someone breaks a rule or law.
I had to pay a $100 penalty for parking in the wrong spot.
When someone is rude, they are mean and not polite.
A vehicle is a thing that moves people or things to another place.
A ferry is a vehicle that takes people from one island to another.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
The rude boy always said “please” and “thank you.” b.
I can admit to a race because I am fast.
We were nice to the rude man, but he was mean to us.
The strong fence let all of the sheep go into the field.
It was loud at the party, so he had to yell for me to hear him.
If you cheat during the game, there will be a penalty.
I do not have enough cash to buy a car.
The Criminal A man had been in jail because he stole things.
Inside, the criminal found a bowl of fruit, a bottle of milk, and a dozen eggs.
But the eggs smelled funny, so he put them in the trash bin.
It was rude for me to come into your home.
It is a mere amount, but it will settle our problem.” The old man said, “ I do not want your money.
On this occasion, the criminal realized that he had been bad.
He listened to the old man and never stole from anyone ever again.
How a criminal changed and learned to be good c.
Why you should not go to places with fences d.
Why did the old man yell at the criminal? a.
The old man reported the criminal’s penalty to the police.
What did the old man do with the criminal at the end of the story? a.
The old man reported the criminal’s penalty to the police.
The old man convinced the thief to never steal again.
What did the old man inspire the criminal to do?
To amuse someone means to do something that is funny or entertaining.
A deck is a wooden floor built outside of a house or the floor of a ship.
When something is firm, it is solid but not too hard.
When something is grand, it is big and liked by people.
A hurricane is a bad storm that happens over the ocean.
A loss means the act or an instance of losing something.
If something is simple, it is plain and not decorated.
He bought a pair of plain white shoes over the weekend.
A reef is a group of rocks or coral that rise to or near the ocean.
He walked along the reef and looked at the water below.
A task is a piece of work to be done that is usually difficult.
My task for the weekend was to clean the entire back yard.
A zone is an area that has different qualities from the ones around it.
Choose the word that is a better fit for each sentence.
The boy found a piece of colorful in the ocean.
That group of rocks coming out of the ocean is a ______________
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
There are l_________________ rules about what people may wear at fancy parties.
If a man wears the wrong clothes, people will 5_________________ the door behind him.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
He blamed me of taking the last piece of pie.
I need to change the way I run so I can be faster, adj______
During their free time, the children did many different activities, en___________ in.
The bad storm over the ocean almost reached the land, hu_______________
Tightly close the window before the rain starts! S ______
He will hit something and break his bike if he closes his eyes while riding.
His ship was very plain, but he never had a problem with it.
He had a grand ship, and he loved having fun.
But he was sure William did not see the storm.
He adjusted the dials on the radio and called his friend.
When William’s ship got to the hurricane, the wind blew it into the reef.
How Thomas is too strict to be a captain c.
He saw the hurricane and did not want to crash.
Why did William’s crew accuse him of being a bad captain? a.
He did not succeed in getting the cotton to its destination.
An apology is something someone says to show that they are sorry.
After arguing with her teacher, the girl wrote the teacher an apology.
A duke is a man of high social rank but below a king or queen.
If people feel guilty, they feel bad for what they did.
To hire someone is to pay them money to work for you.
If someone is innocent, they are not guilty of a crime.
The judge said that the woman was innocent of the crime.
If someone or something is ordinary, they are not special in any way.
If something is permanent, it lasts for a long time or forever.
We don’t know if Aunt Mildred’s visit will be a permanent one.
Dad sprayed a chemical on the house to help preserve its looks.
To pronounce is to say the sounds of letters or words.
Tobacco is a plant whose leaves are smoked, such as in cigarettes.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
The magical woman in the story had a black cat.
My sister gave me words that showed she was sorry when she broke my radio, an apo________
The man went to a place where criminals go for stealing.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
When we were kids, we’d 3_________________ fireflies in jars on summer nights.
We would stand still and wait for them to light up.
A mean duke grew tobacco, and his cardinal rule was to always keep the plants healthy.
Soon, the men brought a woman to him and said, “We captured a witch!”
He asked the duke to loan him one of his plants.
He saw hundreds of small bugs eating it! Then the ministerwent to the jail and did something bold.
Why did the duke hire the men to watch the fields? a.
According to the passage, all the following are true EXCEPT a.
Why did the duke and the minister resemble each other?
A branch is the part of a tree with leaves.
The monkey was hanging from a branch on the tree.
A bridge is something that is built over a river so people can cross it.
To dare means to be brave enough to try something.
He dared to jump out of the airplane and skydive.
A seed is the hard part of a plant or fruit that trees grow from.
I planted the seed in the dirt hoping that it would grow into a tree.
We learned how to subtract numbers from each other in class.
We have to whisper in the library so people can focus on reading.
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
The door was bare when we tookthe paint off of it.
When I tell a secret, I whisper so no one else will hear.
You should save the seed so you can grow another plant.
You can weigh yourself to see if your diet is working.
The Fisherman Every day, a fisherman sat on a bridge.
He cut a branch off of a tree and tied a line to it.
He put a sharp hook on it and made a tight knot.
Then he whispered, “Come here fish.” Like magic, the fish bit the hook.
He put them in a big net and took them home to make big pots of fish soup from them.
I bet that I am a better fisherman than you.
At the end of the day, George subtracted his fish from the fisherman’s.
How a man’s philosophy was a good match for fishing c.
What did the fisherman do every day at the bridge? a.
He would take a breath then jump into the river.
His shirt is made of a very soft type of cloth.
To deserve is to be worthy of something as a result of one’s actions.
If land is fertile, it is able to produce good crops and plants.
Furniture is the things used in a house such as tables and chairs.
His living room only had a few simple pieces of furniture.
To obtain is to get something you want or need.
After I passed the test, I obtained my driver’s license.
When something is religious, it has to do with religion.
When something is romantic, it has to do with love.
A shore is the edge of a large body of water.
Write a word that is similar in meaning to the underlined part.
I don’t like to be in dark rooms with covers overthe windows.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
I need to get a ticket before I can board the train.
Check (V) the sentence with the bolded word that makes better sense.
Many people wear a shell before going out into the rain.
In the past three years, the city has had two floods.
Nowadays, many students like using the Internet to do research.
You cannot ride a bicycle if it doesn’t have wheels.
If you get good grades, you don’t deserve to graduate.
A crab is an example of an animal that has a shell.
If you are romantic, you probably don’t like movies about love.
There are beaches along the shore of some oceans and lakes.
You should see your doctor once a year for an annual checkup.
Osiris and the Nile Long ago, Osiris was the king of Egypt, and Isis was the queen.
They had great intelligence, and they shared their abstract ideas with everyone.
Osiris taught the Egyptians how to make wheels and furniture.
Isis taught them how to make things from clay and cloth.
Osiris made his annual trip around Egypt and led religious events.
The villages gave him beautiful shells and colorful feathers as gifts.
When Osiris returned, Set brought a beautiful wooden box from behind a curtain.
It was an ideal fit! Suddenly, Set closed the box and threw it into the river.
The box washed up on a foreign shore after a flood.
The Egyptian gods thought Isis had done something very romantic.
Because of her love, the gods made him the god of the underworld.
How Osiris died and returned to make Egypt fertile d.
According to the passage, all the following are true EXCEPT a.
What did the Egyptians do for their king and queen?
To assume something is to think that it is true, even with no proof.
To embarrass someone is to make them feel ashamed or foolish.
A formula is a set mathematical way or method of solving a problem.
I learned a new formula that may help us with our problem.
To invest means to use money in a way that will bring a profit later.
I invested money in a new building that should bring me a profit.
If something is practical, it is useful in normal life.
Learning English is practical; you can use it in many places.
A treasure is a collection of valuable things, especially jewels or gold.
They became very rich when they found the buried treasure.
Fill in the blanks with the correct words from the word bank.
The Taxi Driver Peter’s job was driving a taxi downtown.
Every day, he saw new things that appealed to him.
I could learn mathematical formulas and get a job at a bank.
The man urged him to take the money, but he didn’t.
The next day, Peter started his job at the bank.
He was happy to be done with his former job.
How a poor taxi driver got a new job by being kind b.
Why a dull job with a high salary appeals to people c.
How to get a scholarship to go to college d.
