Abstract— The size of data sets being collected and analyzed in the industry for business intelligence is growing rapidly, making traditional warehousing solutions prohibitively expensive.
Hadoop [1] is a popular open-source map-reduce implementation which is being used in companies like Yahoo, Facebook etc.
However, the map-reduce programming model is very low level and requires developers to write custom programs which are hard to maintain and reuse.
In this paper, we present Hive, an open-source data warehousing solution built on top of Hadoop.
Hive supports queries expressed in a SQL-like declarative language - HiveQL, which are compiled into mapreduce jobs that are executed using Hadoop.
In addition, HiveQL enables users to plug in custom map-reduce scripts into queries.
The language includes a type system with support for tables containing primitive types, collections like arrays and maps, and nested compositions of the same.
The underlying IO libraries can be extended to query data in custom formats.
Hive also includes a system catalog - Metastore – that contains schemas and statistics, which are useful in data exploration, query optimization and query compilation.
Apart from ad hoc analysis and business intelligence applications used by analysts across the company, a number of Facebook products are also based on analytics.
These products range from simple reporting applications like Insights for the Facebook Ad Network, to more advanced kind such as Facebook's Lexicon product [2]
As a result a flexible infrastructure that caters to the needs of these diverse applications and users and that also scales up in a cost effective manner with the ever increasing amounts of data being generated on Facebook, is critical.
Hive and Hadoop are the technologies that we have used to address these requirements at Facebook.
The entire data processing infrastructure in Facebook prior to 2008 was built around a data warehouse built using a commercial RDBMS.
The infrastructure at that time was so inadequate that some daily data processing jobs were taking more than a day to process and the situation was just getting worse with every passing day.
We had an urgent need for infrastructure that could scale along with our.
As a result we started exploring Hadoop as a technology to address our scaling needs.
The fact that Hadoop was already an open source project that was being used at petabyte scale and provided scalability using commodity hardware was a very compelling proposition for us.
The same jobs that had taken more than a day to complete could now be completed within a few hours using Hadoop.
However, using Hadoop was not easy for end users, especially for those users who were not familiar with mapreduce.
End users had to write map-reduce programs for simple tasks like getting raw counts or averages.
Hadoop lacked the expressiveness of popular query languages like SQL and as a result users ended up spending hours (if not days) to write programs for even simple analysis.
It was very clear to us that in order to really empower the company to analyze this data more productively, we had to improve the query capabilities of Hadoop.
Bringing this data closer to users is what inspired us to build Hive in January 2007
Our vision was to bring the familiar concepts of tables, columns, partitions and a subset of SQL to the unstructured world of Hadoop, while still maintaining the extensibility and flexibility that Hadoop enjoyed.
Hive was open sourced in August 2008 and since then has been used and explored by a number of Hadoop users for their data processing needs.
Right from the start, Hive was very popular with all users within Facebook.
Today, we regularly run thousands of jobs on the Hadoop/Hive cluster with hundreds of users for a wide variety of applications starting from simple summarization jobs to business intelligence, machine learning applications and to also support Facebook product features.
In the following sections, we provide more details about Hive architecture and capabilities.
Section II describes the data model, the type systems and the HiveQL.
Section III details how data in Hive tables is stored in the underlying distributed file system – HDFS(Hadoop file system)
Section IV describes the system architecture and various components of Hive.
In Section V we highlight the usage statistics of Hive at Facebook and provide related work in Section VI.
The latter can be nested arbitrarily to construct more complex types.
The query language is very similar to SQL and therefore can be easily understood by anyone familiar with SQL.
There are some nuances in the data model, type system and HiveQL that are different from traditional databases and that have been motivated by the experiences gained at Facebook.
We will highlight these and other details in this section.
The type is either a primitive type or a complex type.
These complex types are templated and can be composed to generate types of arbitrary complexity.
These can all be put together in a create table statement to create tables with the desired schema.
For example, the following statement creates a table t1 with a complex schema.
Query expressions can access fields within the structs using a '.' operator.
Values in the associative arrays and lists can be accessed using '[]' operator.
With these constructs Hive is able to support structures of arbitrary complexity.
The tables created in the manner describe above are serialized and deserialized using default serializers and deserializers already present in Hive.
However, there are instances where the data for a table is prepared by some other programs or may even be legacy data.
Hive provides the flexibility to incorporate that data into a table without having to transform the data, which can save substantial amount of time for large data sets.
As we will describe in the later sections, this can be achieved by providing a jar that implements the SerDe java interface to Hive.
In such situations the type information can also be provided by that jar by providing a corresponding implementation of the.
ObjectInspector java interface and exposing that implementation through the getObjectInspector method present in the SerDe interface.
More details on these interfaces can be found on the Hive wiki [3], but the basic takeaway here is that any arbitrary data format and types encoded therein can be plugged into Hive by providing a jar that contains the implementations for the SerDe and ObjectInspector interfaces.
All the native SerDes and complex types supported in Hive are also implementations of these interfaces.
As a result once the proper associations have been made between the table and the jar, the query layer treats these on par with the native types and formats.
As an example, the following statement adds a jar containing the SerDe and ObjectInspector interfaces to the distributed cache([4]) so that it is available to Hadoop and then proceeds to create the table with the custom serde.
Note that, if possible, the table schema could also be provided by composing the complex and primitive types.
Query Language The Hive query language(HiveQL) comprises of a subset of.
Traditional SQL features like from clause subqueries, various types of joins – inner, left outer, right outer and outer joins, cartesian products, group bys and aggregations, union all, create table as select and many useful functions on primitive and complex types make the language very SQL like.
In fact for many of the constructs mentioned before it is exactly like SQL.
This enables anyone familiar with SQL to start a hive cli(command line interface) and begin querying the system right away.
Useful metadata browsing capabilities like show tables and describe are also present and so are explain plan capabilities to inspect query plans (though the plans look very different from what you would see in a traditional RDBMS)
Hive currently does not support inserting into an existing table or data partition and all inserts overwrite the existing data.
Accordingly, we make this explicit in our syntax as follows:
We have rarely seen a case where the query cannot be expressed as an equi-join and since most of the data is loaded into our warehouse daily or hourly, we simply load the data into a new partition of the table for that day or hour.
However, we do realize that with more frequent loads the number of partitions can become very large and that may require us to implement INSERT INTO semantics.
The lack of INSERT INTO, UPDATE and DELETE in Hive on the other hand do allow us to use very simple mechanisms to deal with reader and writer concurrency without implementing complex locking protocols.
Apart from these restrictions, HiveQL has extensions to support analysis expressed as map-reduce programs by users and in the programming language of their choice.
This enables advanced users to express complex logic in terms of mapreduce programs that are plugged into HiveQL queries seamlessly.
Some times this may be the only reasonable approach e.g.
The canonical word count example on a table of documents can, for example, be expressed using mapreduce in the following manner:
The CLUSTER BY clause in the sub-query specifies the output columns that are hashed on to distributed the data to the reducers and finally the REDUCE clause specifies the user program to invoke (python wc_reduce.py  in this case) on the output columns of the subquery.
Sometimes, the distribution criteria between the mappers and the reducers needs to provide data to the reducers such that it is sorted on a set of columns that are different from the ones that are used to do the distribution.
An example could be the case where all the actions in a session need to be ordered by time.
Hive provides the DISTRIBUTE BY and SORT BY clauses to accomplish this as shown in the following example:
Note, in the example above there is no map clause which indicates that the input columns are not transformed.
Similarly, it is possible to have a MAP clause without a REDUCE clause in case the reduce phase does not do any transformation of data.
Also in the examples shown above, the FROM clause appears before the SELECT clause which is another deviation from standard SQL syntax.
Hive allows users to interchange the order of the FROM and SELECT/MAP/REDUCE clauses within a given sub-query.
This becomes particularly useful and intuitive when dealing with multi inserts.
HiveQL supports inserting different transformation results into different tables, partitions, hdfs or local directories as part of the same query.
This ability helps in reducing the number of scans done on the input data as shown in the following example:
Data Storage While the tables are logical data units in Hive, table.
The primary data units and their mappings in the hdfs name space are as follows:
Tables – A table is stored in a directory in hdfs.
Partitions – A partition of the table is stored in a subdirectory within a table's directory.
Buckets – A bucket is stored in a file within the.
A partitioned table can be created by specifying the PARTITIONED BY clause in the CREATE TABLE statement as shown below.
In the example shown above the table partitions will be stored in /user/hive/warehouse/test_part directory in hdfs.
A partition exists for every distinct value of ds and hr specified by the user.
Note that the partitioning columns are not part of the table data and the partition column values are encoded in the directory path of that partition (they are also stored in the table metadata)
A new partition can be created through an INSERT statement or through an ALTER statement that adds a partition to the table.
The INSERT statement also populates the partition with data from table t, where as the alter table creates an empty partition.
This approach does create some complications in case the partition value contains characters such as / or : that are used by hdfs to denote directory structure, but proper escaping of those characters does take care of a producing an hdfs compatible directory name.
The Hive compiler is able to use this information to prune the directories that need to be scanned for data in order to evaluate a query.
Pruning the data has a significant impact on the time it takes to process the query.
In many respects this partitioning scheme is similar to what has been referred to as list partitioning by many database vendors ([6]), but there are differences in that the values of the partition keys are stored with the metadata instead of the data.
The final storage unit concept that Hive uses is the concept of Buckets.
A bucket is a file within the leaf level directory of a table or a partition.
At the time the table is created, the user can specify the number of buckets needed and the column on which to bucket the data.
In the current implementation this information is used to prune the data in case the user runs the query on a sample of data e.g.
Note that the onus of ensuring that the bucket files are properly created and named are a responsibility of the application and HiveQL DDL statements do not currently try to bucket the data in a way that it becomes compatible to the table properties.
Though the data corresponding to a table always resides in the <warehouse_root_directory>/test_table location in hdfs, Hive also enables users to query data stored in other locations in hdfs.
This can be achieved through the EXTERNAL TABLE clause as shown in the following example.
In addition the data files are stored in the location /user/mytables/mydata in hdfs.
Note that as no custom SerDe has been defined it is assumed that the data is in Hive’s internal format.
An external table differs from a normal table in only that a drop table command on an external table only drops the table metadata and does not delete any data.
A drop on a normal table on the other hand drops the data associated with the table as well.
Serialization/Deserialization (SerDe) As mentioned previously Hive can take an implementation of the SerDe java interface provided by the user and associate it to a table or partition.
As a result custom data formats can easily be interpreted and queried from.
The default SerDe implementation in Hive is called the LazySerDe – it deserializes rows into internal objects lazily so that the cost of deserialization of a column is incurred only if the column of the row is needed in some query expression.
This SerDe can also be used to read data that uses any other delimiter character between columns.
In addition, delimiters can be specified to delimit the serialized keys and values of maps and different delimiters can also be specified to delimit the various elements of a list (collection)
Apart from LazySerDe, some other interesting SerDes are present in the hive_contrib.jar that is provided with the distribution.
A particularly useful one is RegexSerDe which enables the user to specify a regular expression to parse various columns out from a row.
The following statement can be used for example, to interpret apache logs.
The input.regex property is the regular expression applied on each record and the output.format.string indicates how the column fields can be constructed from the group matches in the regular expression.
This example also illustrates how arbitrary key value pairs can be passed to a serde using the WITH SERDEPROPERTIES clause, a capability that can be very useful in order to pass arbitrary parameters to a custom SerDe.
A file format in Hadoop specifies how records are stored in a file.
Text files for example are stored in the TextInputFormat and binary files can be stored as SequenceFileInputFormat.
Hive does not impose an restrictions on the type of file input formats, that the data is stored in.
The format can be specified when the table is created.
Apart from the two formats mentioned above, Hive also provides an RCFileInputFormat which stores the data in a column oriented manner.
Such an organization can give important performance improvements specially for queries that do not access all the columns of the table.
Users can add their own file formats and associate them to a table as shown in the following statement.
The STORED AS clause specifies the classes to be used to determine the input and output formats of the files in the table’s or partition’s directory.
This can be any class that implements the FileInputFormat and FileOutputFormat java interfaces.
The classes can be provded to Hadoop in a jar in ways similar to those shown in the examples on adding custom SerDes.
The following components are the main building blocks in Hive:
Metastore – The component that stores the system catalog and metadata about tables, columns, partitions etc.
Driver – The component that manages the lifecycle of a HiveQL statement as it moves through Hive.
The driver also maintains a session handle and any session statistics.
Query Compiler – The component that compiles HiveQL into a directed acyclic graph of map/reduce tasks.
Execution Engine – The component that executes the tasks produced by the compiler in proper dependency order.
HiveServer – The component that provides a thrift interface and a JDBC/ODBC server and provides a way of integrating Hive with other applications.
Extensibility Interfaces which include the SerDe and ObjectInspector interfaces already described previously as well as the UDF(User Defined Function) and UDAF(User Defined Aggregate Function) interfaces that enable users to define their own custom functions.
A HiveQL statement is submitted via the CLI, the web UI or an external client using the thrift, odbc or jdbc interfaces.
The driver first passes the query to the compiler where it goes through the typical parse, type check and semantic analysis phases, using the metadata stored in the Metastore.
The compiler generates a logical plan that is then optimized through a simple rule based optimizer.
Finally an optimized plan in the form of a DAG of map-reduce tasks and hdfs tasks is generated.
The execution engine then executes these tasks in the order of their dependencies, using Hadoop.
In this section we provide more details on the Metastore, the Query Compiler and the Execution Engine.
Metastore The Metastore acts as the system catalog for Hive.
This information can be queried or modified using a thrift ([7]) interface and as a result it can be called from clients in different programming languages.
As this information needs to be served fast to the compiler, we have chosen to store this information on a traditional RDBMS.
The Metastore thus becomes an application that runs on an RDBMS and uses an open source ORM layer called DataNucleus ([8]), to convert object representations into a relational schema and vice versa.
We chose this approach as opposed to storing this information in hdfs as we need the Metastore to be very low latency.
The DataNucleus layer allows us to plugin many different RDBMS technologies.
In our deployment at Facebook, we use mysql to store this information.
Without the system catalog it is not possible to impose a structure on hadoop files.
As a result it is important that the information stored in the Metastore is backed up regularly.
Ideally a replicated server should also be deployed in order to provide the availability that many production environments need.
It is also important to ensure that this server is able to scale with the number of queries submitted by the users.
Hive addresses that by ensuring that no Metastore calls are made from the mappers or the reducers of a job.
Any metadata that is needed by the mapper or the reducer is passed through xml plan files that are generated by the compiler and that contain any information that is needed at the run time.
The ORM logic in the Metastore can be deployed in client libraries such that it runs on the client side and issues direct calls to an RDBMS.
This deployment is easy to get started with and ideal if the only clients that interact with Hive are the CLI or the web UI.
However, as soon as Hive metadata needs to get manipulated and queried by programs in languages like python, php etc., i.e.
Query Compiler The metadata stored in the Metastore is used by the query.
Similar to compilers in traditional databases, the Hive compiler processes HiveQL statements in the following steps:
Parse – Hive uses Antlr to generate the abstract syntax tree (AST) for the query.
Type checking and Semantic Analysis – During this phase, the compiler fetches the information of all the input and output tables from the Metastore and uses that information to build a logical plan.
It checks type compatibilities in expressions and flags any compile time semantic errors at this stage.
The transformation of an AST to an operator DAG goes through an intermediate representation that is called the query block (QB) tree.
The compiler converts nested queries into parent child relationships in a QB tree.
At the same time, the QB tree representation also helps in organizing the relevant parts of the AST tree in a form that is more amenable to be transformed into an operator DAG than the vanilla AST.
Optimization – The optimization logic consists of a chain of transformations such that the operator DAG resulting from one transformation is passed as input to the next transformation.
Anyone wishing to change the compiler or wishing to add new optimization logic can easily do that by implementing the transformation as an extension of the Transform interface and adding it to the chain of transformations in the optimizer.
The transformation logic typically comprises of a walk on the operator DAG such that certain processing actions are taken on the operator DAG when relevant conditions or rules are satisfied.
The five primary interfaces that are involved in a transformation are Node, GraphWalker, Dispatcher, Rule and Processor.
The nodes in the operator DAG implement the Node interface.
This enables the operator DAG to be manipulated using the other interfaces mentioned above.
The Dispatcher maintains the mappings from Rules to Processors and does the Rule matching.
It is passed to the GraphWalker so that the appropriate Processor can be dispatched while a Node is being visited in the walk.
The following transformations are done currently in Hive as part of the optimization stage:
Column pruning – This optimization step ensures that only the columns that are needed in the query processing are actually projected out of the row.
Predicate pushdown – Predicates are pushed down to the scan if possible so that rows can be filter early in the processing.
Partition pruning – Predicates on partitioned columns are used to prune out files of partitions that do not satisfy the predicate.
Map side joins – In the cases where some of the tables in a join are very small, the small tables are replicated in all the mappers and joined with other tables.
This behavior is triggered by a hint in the query of the form:
A number of parameters control the amount of memory that is used on the mapper to hold the contents of the replicated table.
These are hive.mapjoin.size.key and hive.mapjoin.cache.numrows that control the number of rows of the table that are kept in memory at any time and also provide the system the size of the join key.
Join reordering – The larger tables are streamed and not materialized in memory in the reducer while the smaller tables are kept in memory.
This ensures that the join operation does not exceed memory limits on the reducer side.
In addition to the MAPJOIN hint, the user can also provide hints or set parameters to do the following:
In such situations the usual plan of distributing the data on the group by columns and then aggregating in the reducer does not work well as most of the data gets sent to a very few reducers.
A better plan in such situations is to use two map/reduce stages to compute the aggregation.
In the first stage the data is randomly distributed (or distributed on the DISTINCT column in case of distinct aggregations) to the reducers and the partial aggregations are computed.
These partial aggregates are then distributed on the GROUP BY columns to the reducers in the second map/reduce stage.
Since the number of the partial aggregation tuples is much smaller than the base data set, this approach typically leads to better performance.
In Hive this behavior can be triggered by setting a parameter in the following manner:
Hash based partial aggregations in the mappers – Hash based partial aggregations can potentially reduce the data that is sent by the mappers to the reducers.
This in turn reduces the amount of time spent in sorting and merging this data.
As a result a lot of performance gains can be achieved using this strategy.
Hive enables users to control the amount of memory that can be used on the mapper to hold the rows in a hash table for this optimization.
The parameter hive.map.aggr.hash.percentmemory specifies the fraction of mapper memory that can be used to hold the hash table, e.g.
The parameter hive.map.aggr.hash.min.reduction is also used to control the amount of memory used in the mappers.
As an example a group by on skewed data can generate two map/reduce tasks followed by a final hdfs task which moves the results to the correct location in hdfs.
At the end of this stage the physical plan looks like a DAG of tasks with each task encapsulating a part of the plan.
We show a sample multi-table insert query and its corresponding physical plan after all optimizations below.
This query has a single join followed by two different aggregations.
The plan for the query is shown in Fig 3 below.
The nodes in the plan are physical operators and the edges represent the flow of data between operators.
The last line in each node represents the output schema of that operator.
For lack of space, we do not describe the parameters specified within each operator node.
Query plan for multi-table insert query with 3 map/reduce jobs.
Within the same map-reduce job, the portion of the operator tree below the repartition operator (ReduceSinkOperator) is executed by the mapper and the portion above by the reducer.
Thus, the second and third map-reduce jobs wait for the first map-reduce job to finish.
Execution Engine Finally the tasks are executed in the order of their.
Each dependent task is only executed if all of its prerequisites have been executed.
A map/reduce task first serializes its part of the plan into a plan.xml file.
This file is then added to the job cache for the task and instances of ExecMapper and ExecReducers are spawned using Hadoop.
Each of these classes deserializes the plan.xml and executes the relevant part of the operator DAG.
At the end of the entire query, the final data is moved to the desired location in case of DMLs.
In the case of queries the data is served as such from the temporary location.
Typical compression ratio is 1:7 and sometime more than that.
With the continuous growth in the Facebook network we see continuous growth in data.
At the same time as the company scales, the cluster also has to scale with the growing users.
More than half the workload is on adhoc queries where as the rest is for reporting dashboards.
Hive has enabled this kind of workload on the Hadoop cluster in Facebook because of the simplicity with which adhoc analysis can be done.
However, sharing the same resources by the adhoc users and reporting users presents significant operational challenges because of the unpredictability of adhoc jobs.
Many times these jobs are not properly tuned and therefore consume valuable cluster resources.
This can in turn lead to degraded performance of the reporting queries, many of which are time critical.
Resource scheduling has been somewhat weak in Hadoop and the only viable solution at present seems to be maintaining separate clusters for adhoc queries and reporting queries.
There is also a wide variety in the Hive jobs that are run daily.
They range from simple summarization jobs generating different kinds of rollups and cubes to more advanced machine learning algorithms.
The system is used by novice users as well as advanced users with new users being able to use the system immediately or after an hour long beginners training.
A result of heavy usage has also lead to a lot of tables generated in the warehouse and this has in turn tremendously increased the need for data discovery tools, especially for new users.
In general the system has enabled us to provide data processing services to engineers and analysts at a fraction of the cost of a more traditional warehousing infrastructure.
Added to that the ability of Hadoop to scale to thousands of commodity nodes gives us the confidence that we will be able to scale this infrastructure going forward as well.
Scope[14] is an SQL-like language on top of Microsoft’s proprietary Cosmos map/reduce and distributed file system.
Pig[13] allows users to write declarative scripts to process data.
Hive is different from these systems since it provides a system catalog that persists metadata about tables within the system.
This allows hive to function as a traditional warehouse which can interface with standard reporting tools like MicroStrategy[16]
HadoopDB[15] reuses most of Hive’s system, except, it uses traditional database instances in each of the nodes to store data instead of using a distributed file system.
It is an open-source project, and is being actively worked on by Facebook as well as several external contributors.
HiveQL currently accepts only a subset of SQL as valid queries.
Hive currently has a naive rule-based optimizer with a small number of simple rules.
We plan to build a costbased optimizer and adaptive optimization techniques to come up with more efficient plans.
We are exploring columnar storage and more intelligent data placement to improve scan performance.
We are running performance benchmarks based on [9] to measure our progress as well as compare against other systems.
The improvements involved using faster Hadoop data structures to process the data, for example, using Text instead of String.
Based on these experiments, we have identified several areas for performance improvement and have begun working on them.
We are enhancing the JDBC and ODBC drivers for Hive for integration with commercial BI tools that only work with traditional relational warehouses.
We are exploring methods for multi-query optimization techniques and performing generic n-way joins in a single map-reduce job.
We would like to thank our user and developer community for their contributions, with special thanks to Eric Hwang, Yuntao Jia, Yongqiang He, Edward Capriolo, and Dhruba Borthakur.
